The moon's evil eye is screwing up our kids' lives on the sky
It was a beautiful afternoon in March, 22 years ago.
The river beats out a rhythm on the flat stone in a rush to sew a symphony and carry the drum's cry all the way up to the palmtree's bonnet
Good bye.
smudging the bad air
I can survive.
just like that I'd grab hold of earth and give her
To that end, I captured it and harmonised it for you like the soulful beat ofa drum at the bottom of my heart.
You make me shiver Like a hurricane
While festooning our horizon
but his dreams are the artillery of words loaded to uncoil our strength
Stares down the bad mouths
As you know, I have accepted the distance that separated us forawhile like a cross. I would have let it fall if I had wished to.
All these roadblocks I face one after the other sometimes two, three at the same time, sometimes in succession - in my quest for a solid foundation on which to build our dreams.
Soul, I can't remember the details of those times gone by:
Morne lHopital was coyly saying a final goodbye with tears in her eyes.
and bring forth a new dimension to our beautiful Creole tongue which is gaining in stature in contemporary Haitian literature.
I am counting on you.
Each day we rise
Dear Soul.
The stones turn into Songs like gaiety in a romance
That's when our dream will enter a new dimension where age, like cold water, will temper our achievernents.
to dress our island up
I still dream about it.
One of those sunny, unforgettable Saturdays we used to enjoy back home.
You steal away
Celebrating our newborn love
Dreams Without frontier
how poetry, poetical philosophy, hope, and love converge to awaken your sense of pleasure and your passions prose,
Laundry disfigures her hands
Dreams For our family
Be strong,
sparkled in the depth of our eyes subsided. We did everything, took every precaution in order to enjoy the moment without fear. These momnents, Soul, they cannot be created. They come, spontaneously, without warning, laced with unforgettable delight. Oh! How sweet it would be if every day could be Friday I love you Soul.
you must know how many crossroads her petticoat has seen how many flame she's traversed before her bonnet tips over
Darling
Good evening Soul.
The Saint Lawrence isn't salty
we are now breathing its fresh air from the other side of the ocean.
The pilgrims songs had the same effect on our ears.
You stand our spirit up Your seven-branched star paves our life with light
because, as I said before, a mom remains always a mom.
The buds of love still unfold
Good morning Soul,
Without tearing out Even one hair
Flowing through my veins
leaving you with all my love.
Your words of courage make a nest, clear sparks through Customs for our harvest
You set me down, gently
your foto hitches a ride on the cracked ice of a frozen river
to the source of well-being
Today your spirit rode me all day long, it didn't give my soul breath to take a rest. My clock is so rocked by you it's as if we were still sitting side by side at the foot of Mont Hópital, where love for one reared its head in the other.
You nourish our spirit
From lfe To Soul
OUR ISLAND IV
atop the wooden backs of trucks,
The day I come to the end
in her bonfire of daily bread the shoe-soles of her days eat dust swallow up crossroads give up the buffer for the load
You kissed me with all your heart.
Soul, being here is like living in a China shop in the middle of a fragile town.
Complete silence. The rustling motion of an unseen intruder interrupts my thoughts. It's with this friendly presence I celebrate the happy arrival of the twins.
Science can detect the most subtle sounds of the human body.
For Hugues Lamou and Garry Gauthier
Soul,
A brief instant
The night bursts out scrcaming
bulldozes a road of light
To Yvon Lamour
Big Kiss !!
taking care of love at the feet of the May moon
In the dynamic of that mutual feeling as it was dreamed, willed and accepted, lives a determination that opens on a vista of social commitnent.
« Patience makes the food cook »
« When you've been had you know it »
on all the earth's guts
From the starting line
We accept to live apart for so long so that we can build together a cathedral of dreams.
The rose loses its way, blinking
Together we would like our love to escape the trials of our existence, to grow and rise in harmony as it was lor Pekou and Da.
The rainbow flows like a watercolour
To Nounous
MIAMI
The river rolls
Woman, you carry life
The winds of hope are on a quest
For my father
Then you must be on your way
The river is trapped
From where I sit I can see only a vast, snow-covered white expanse and it's so cold outside.
Powders riverbank stones
Everytime the semaphore gives us a signal my spirit travels
My dear Soul,
Upon reading these letters, you can easily discover
Dont give up.
The most meaningful harmony is born from you when you reflect on all of your actions and of all the words you utter.
in whirlpools to make eyes at me Te conch-shell sounds
Page 13
to slide around the sideburns of your navel my eyes promenade
to the spring at Turgeau
Remember, before you wrote Zile Nou. you told me:
You are a deep spring which sweetly flows into the snare of mny caress
In a stone's throw rising
Do you remember those saplings that seemed to want to enlace the big cisalpina tree in a tender embrace?
"a mother's arms never refuse to offer shelter to her brood, good or bad."
Soul! What is done is done. You can moan and groan and damn everything around yoy or what you perceive as the cause of your tribulations. Al those unhealthy though ts wil not right the wrong that has been done.
Soul, the road to lile is full of obstacles. No one knows the outcome in advance. That is
I love you
No, the day you gave me that kiss, the tangible sign of our alliance, it was a day of celebration in my heart and in your mind.
However, never forget the four of us, you, myself, the children we are in a squeeze.
A returning wave spreads the Caribbean sea
His voice is locked up
You tiptoe And avoid frightening the doe You said your promises Are like candles of hope
The flamnes will burn Sweeter, warmer and brighter
Happy anniversary
is a burst of air
« Fast is right, slow is right Two rights make it alright »
« The knife knows the heart of the yam>
The Saint Lawrence stands cross-like on my tongue
Therefore, hold on tight, Soul!
« Rushing around won't make the sun risexsa
We're Caribbean islands
But still the Artibonite River drips like a tap the Grandanse River curls up inside a calabash
I cannot wait for your answer belore writing to you again.
everywhere life and death are locking horns
Tell me Do you remember?
A frisky little wind shakes its body
Though the triplets are separated
It is better or a family to stumble on icy ground together than see the ground crumble under the weight of a mother and three children in a sorry state, waiting for the return of a father away, studying.
THIS LETTER'S FOR YOu
What time is hiding from us.
When a great distance o of two a hundred leagues slithers through everyday realities, all responsibilities belall the mother.
My trouble started on the terrace not far from the quenepe when I gave you my word.
That is why I keep repeating: "A mom is a mom”
On that day, although my entire body was shaking with fear,
Dear Ife,
The most neaningful harmony
Yet, should they become reality, we should not stop there.
Don't be discouraged.
Its a normal situation.
For a drean to turn into reality, it must face all kinds of tests:
I remember it as if it were yesterday.
separation,
This epistolary undertaking is a follow-up to an idea submitted to fellow writers who share the same ideology with respect to works in Creole. In 1992, I had suggested that this genre be given a place amongst other works in Haitian Creole Literature.
It was not too close to the city nor was it too far away from it.
The flames will burn Sweeter, warmer and brighter
rips time to shreds
As the saying goes
To my mother
by your fountain,
You take me in your embrace, shake me
market women doing overtime for peanuts
« Mourning 0, We cry out in mourning, O Haiti !»
But in mny heart !!!
We are like a three-branched tree
each one evolves according to its own plan.
I am so glad that you find ways to shore up your courage in order to wait for me.
sickness,
Dear Ife,
but our dreams are stillborn
Once the correspondent decides to break away, all understanding evaporates into thin air like the dew after sunrise.
...We're butterflies we carry news to them
Page 10
You disappear
into necklaces for the children of Lent
...
alongside man toe to toe with rags of fire...
With images and echoes of songs
Soul
The sky hunkers down under the sun's bald shine
For Daniel Boukmann and Max Rippon
a little cove of greenery where nature did not have to dress up to us with her perfume.
A fades little song goes flat in my mouth
upon our arrival, the birds and the morning breeze welcomed us, singing in harmony.
Hugs and kisses from your darling Soul.
You say you can make no promises because, as far as feelings go, if our heads and hearts share the same space,
and stars of snow
A student without a school has lost his voice at Titanyen His breath
the course of fireworks
The mermaid shut her eyes
thus, the struggle for life must go on.
Ogoun Feray's vèvè*
You are in my life
to string the beads of the north wind
In my dreams smashed into a thousand pieces
For Maximilien Laroche
When a brave womnan's out walking she looks just like Mistress Life
The path I retrace in your memory tonight is the one that runs through the back roads of Morne IHôpital,
Like fireworks in my heart
No matter the age of a child, young or adult, no matter the sacrifice, a mother is always ready to devote herself to the wellbeing of her children.
We never dreant that one day we would have to share our knowledge with children in North America.
Tonight, neither of us is lurking at the foot of Morne I’Hopital.
Drags in the wake of our love?
A limitless heat reverberates
Let's dress our dreams with festoons and gems
write this letter.
You light the way for me
I understand your rebuke.
A Saturday that bears no resenblance to today.
The sun takes a hairpin turn abandoned
higher than beams of sunlight
YOU'RE BLESSED
Let us go forward.
Rises straight up
that give us wings of doves so that we rise to the sky
We will talk again soon.
but it can make our hearts walk side by side under a canopy of love
To Julio Jean-Pierre and Nicolas Hyppolite Jr.
We're Caribbean islands
the Grenier River
For Wilner Morisseau and Kénel Hyppolite
I hope that wisdom will always prevail.
Meanwhile, all the trees that used to tease our bodies with the coolness of their shade have disappeared, their metamorphised into charcoal, houses and furniture completed, consummated. If you see Morne l'Hôpital today you will not be to find appropriate words to express such an ecological disaster.
However, it could not fathom your surprise together with your joy when you found yourself face to face with your twins still warm from your womb.
Like the moon in June
and bringing water down to the Courtyard of « yes, sir » women raise a ladder high as the wind Sweeping the dew
to Saint Gérard
grows beautiful seweeping in New Year's day braiding hope at the ears of sleeping stars
OUR ISLAND II
walked in stride
Our two lives will fuse into one like those spirits dwelling at the source of the water, mistress of all forms of life on earth.
The sky was a young girl
That your distant life
When I am feeling down, I open wide the gates of my memories to the luminous flow of our promises from days gone by.
We were in our Own place where.
the Rideau River wraps herself
People believe, I think, that I try to explain your absence from Montreal by using the pretense of a husband away at school.
to Mont Hôpital
Many times when two people live in the same house for a long time, they have to confront the time when feelings come tumbling down making room for habit to sit and shoot the bull.
Oh! How sweet it would be ifevery day couldl I i be Friday
« With patience we'll find the nipple of the ant»
with each strand of hair on my head
The warmth of your love is the strength of my heart
Dear Soul,
through all my pores
Woman's accusing finger fears neither pope nor priest
They always welcomed us with a respectful bow each season under the freshness of their boughs.
I felt fearless.
on a mighty spider web
Don't let go!
Big kisses
However, Ife we would not want to be taken by surprise.
Wild ants chonicle the blows of life on all the walls of Krome Avenue
If you remember, it was on that stone that we let our eyes speak what our lips could not express. Here we dreamt about our achievemens, our unfulfilled dreams, our unreachable dreams.
goes around in circles
Perhaps you dont understand, but harmony, you see, iS up to you alone to create.
Friends, inside my heart a river is carrying misery down into the earth's belly
My soul's in a trap
teasing me
My chest swelled with pride and I was walking on clouds.
WOMAN
"The sun in New York runs upside down' according to one of our songs while we in Montreal move on ice rinks.
to draw a fistful of water into life's basket,
You asked me to be patient.
Decorate her navel with an ilan-ilan flower so she can entice life
It must Spring from your intimate being, One can lean on someone else to create it.
Hold on tightly.
to make a well-oiled machine turn over
Let us be strong.
I leave with a leaden heart.
CARIBBEAN ISLANDS
Life takes so many short cuts that we are never sure where it's going to lead us.
We will not realise all our dreams - that's a fact.
Scattering our seeds to the four winds
I am pulling it behind me.  `
Age stalks us, its true, but our kite should continue rising straight up in the sky of our experience where the pillar of our patience will make it roar in a space we've Created for us both, in the island garden of your womanly body.
Everytime I prepare a bed
The children are counting on you.
Good morning Soul,
the vapor of your seed invades the earth's soul with an army of sparks singing the old refrain a symphony that doesn't want to end
but this type of harmony born out of external relationship with ones surroundings is always ephemeral.
I'd like to needle the earth Give her a good poke Paint a coat of stardust on her face
A love nest
For Kéder and Gaetjens
Do you remember the mist like a muslin coverlet cascading under a bedspread laid by the splendour of May?
For Vilbrun Romulus and Jean-Danicl Jocl Chouloute
But for the feeling to come back and prepare the soil to make things bright and new, the two (2) people must rebuild the freshness of their youth in their days of love.
Beautiful manes of multi-colored inks
We dance a two-step with our dreams at the bonfire of gatherings
Two stars weaving: A love nest
This way, you can formulate your own wishes and in that serene attitude towards yourself.
«O three leaves, O threc roots.. trown away, collected, remembered I >
If this long wait has not vanquished my resolve, the day has not yet come when I would be forced to abandon our plans from when we were young.
Toto Bissainthe
There lies the whole mystery of life.
We loved our Haiti Toma so much and we had such big dreams for her.
Last night you spoke to me as I was lost in deep reflection. I I was trying to find away to ease your pain. I was thinking of the kind of book that I should give you that would lit your spirit. Iwas thinking of a lot of other possibilities. In the end, however, ,I decided to
All I know is that it was a Saturday.
in the heart of the diamond sun
your voice the breath of contentment
Adieu, Soul.
You transport it across the face of the sun Thanks to you, misery melts away  While I clamber around the rocks  The water falls down the valley  And you make a sail out of the wind  Bedecking it with a rainbow of hope
braids ribbons of fire
You lift our spirit
Each wave of dream
our love grew
over eighteen hundred an four thighs
Nevertheless, to repeat old adage dear to our wise friends from the back country: Our patience must continue to shoot the cannons of hope all the way through the summits of the "Guinaudée.
and Jean-Robert Placide
Because unattainable perfection will continue to elude us, we are bound to go on.
I will transmit to your spirit any unspoken words at the appropriate time or I can simply say:" Beautiful experience for a young mother!" I hope that this new encounter will grow into the harmonious unity of our family just as we told each other when, way back, we sat on a canape not far from the guenep tree, silent witness to our confidences.
However, my spirit is going to tickle your spirit as it did on the day when we had to fight to dispel the feeling of distance between us.
Be strong, be courageous
In the land of hawks
Page 7
Adieu
For Medjine and Mendjaly
Your strength plants the shoots of sunlight ceaselessly in the garden of our knowledge
No matter what the length of the road, it's what awaits us at the end that counts.
Do you remember William and his camera?
We live with great expectation, like a thirsty field longing for the smell of the rain.
of all the trials and tribulations
arrange themselves in a row of springs On life's water-table like a thief
You're a pure mnarble in the circle of ny heart
Dear friends! Happy reading.
I still recall those crazy Fridays fulloflaughter. You see, Soul. when you want to, you can let yourself go, softly. On Friday, it was the hearty laughter, the heady laughter of the terrace. Tonight, it's that phrase from that songstress that overwhelms Ime as in good old days when I skipped my trigonometry classes to come and join you on the yesteryear, in the heart of our tender a adolescence. The sentence in which the songwriter
In a memo you sent to me, you broached the subject of harmony but.
tugs at the rope of our days
Dear Readers,
Iwanted to share these thoughts with you tonight hoping that you would understand. Ihope that you will let them leave their imprints one at a time until the secret treasure chest we all carry within ourselves is full. Yes, Soul, each one of us is a treasure chest. By digging relentlessly we will find the gold pieces hidden within ourselves. Let's keep on amassing the beautiful and precious gems in the treasure chest of our heart.
We will never discover
One more time, I beg you to be strong.
You comne back
tease the marble of dreams,
my spirit staggers
OUR ISLAND III
we plant grows
You take small steps.
Lightning sketches
My love for them explodes
Page 11
I agree. Dont worry about me.
Ife
MOURNING
This collection of Letters from Ife and Soul constitutes a novel experiment in Haitian Creole Literature.
at high noon
Soul, I would love to share a lot of things with you.
Will there ever be a kiss like that first kiss?
Woman leads life by the hand
with a bcautiful Haitian flower pinned to my stumbling heart
so that she can fly making loop-the-loops and somersaults
Our springtimes bloom with male kenep flowers
O Woman nothing can fence in your courage
This is why today I want to tell you I love you still andiwant to make you feel the radiance of all the love unwinding from my heart for you.
I said happy for when you were attached to those stirrups, you could not know or guess what kind of children, normal or deformed, that were going to be introduced to you.
Furthermore, at the very source of that imaginary work, the universal love that I nurture for all those who fight for social justice unfolds in its fullness.
The sunflower closed down long ago
Hold on tightly.
we have to keep on pooling our knowledge until we reach the end of that voyage. Never lorget that we are travellers and through our perambulation, each step we take is an opportunity for someone, a family member, a friend to grow with us while our inner self experiences a touch of beauty.
That fill the space bey ond our body.
My eyes open on your body
And oh! Surprise!
You steal back into my space
Yes! That's how it happened every two veeks under the verdant cushion of the mombins, the sirouels and the kenep trees hats the way the sun continued to shine for the lovers who took refuge in the underbelly of Morne l'Hôpital.
the starward kite
until she lands all lit up on the island of men's conscience
LITTLE STINGER
Our love sleeps behind the carthenware jars in order to mate the moon with the sun
When a woman falls seven times before she cries uncle
But, do you know, Soul, I always lived in the shelter of my mother.
At that late hour I was not present. I could neither share the deep emotion or live that marvelous moment with you.
we took possession with the sheer strength of our love.
Hugs and kisses.
Do you remember? We laughed. But you dont realize today that we, too, have Our wave. It's that famous wave, unchained yet full of I grace and calmness that a colleague had exchanged for a painting of Heads of States. That wav That wave, Our wave, seems to be bounding bevond the moon. It's as though it went after the sun which, fecling threatened to
Page 12
Untold, serene joy dwells in our spirit
Women carry life
When a woman fights
Will it ever be possible to fathom
DISCOURAGEMENT
When I reached the other side of the gate, I was completely overwhelmed with joy.
For sidewalk diplomat and Michel-Ange Hyppolite Jr.
Here, life demands sacrifices and discipline.
Each road unwinds, full of secrets
The river smiles for me
This having been said, we will resume this brief commentary on Creole in another letter.
My star of eighteen years saddles me plays tag
EARTH
This is the load I ask you to carry during my absence
Dreams For our homeland
They cut the rainbow to bits under our armpits
You melt into the mist
Big Kisses
RIVER
OUR ISLAND I
unravels sparks of a thousand color in my heart
Everytime your shadow graces my dreams
Speech has crawled up a tree
I want to remind you that I am not carrying that load.
Two stars weaving
In spite of it all, my education rermains my sole preoccupation.
The intense turnoil
Love and kisses.
In Miami's underbelly mangy sea-waves play ring-around-the-rosie with 7 little angels
On that day, we will celebrate; we will sing praise so that the bouquet of our affection will continue to bloom in the same atmosphere of sincerity that keeps us more and more closely together.
The last time we went that way we weren't alone.
I would like to offer my opinion on this topic.
Emile C. Mégie
THE RIDEAU RIVER
its nakedness displayed
Ace of passion throwing love on the fresh air of your moves
And as for you what river's flowing in your heart ?
I know temptation is an open trap waiting for all the lovers who shun their responsibilities.
on the hip of the sun for your body to blossom
That will put our feelings on solid ground
You run around
to keep my words from going stale
The strokes of her clothes-beater between collarbone and hollow braid ribbons
Life is renewed in every step you take
It's with a double happiness that I blowa double kiss to you and our twins.
