For example, if you meet someone.
The person who asks the question 
For example, in the case of you.
I asked him, "Where are you?"
Where are you, because you don't want to be in the world, because you don't want to be in the world?
The men, who are so good, ask them where they are.
For example, when I say something, how will I say it?
Do you want to know how to do the job or do you want to know how to do it?
It's almost as if I'm going to be okay.
Or I can continue to do so.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
A networked area is a networked area.
or two by the sea.
I've seen a great series of mountaineering trips along the coast.
How do you call it?
For example, the men in the water and the fish in the pond know how to swim their fish.
So where li o gen dwa men jwen n yon a package of fatra men gen dwa century l
Yo plant or yo gen right bati sou li
How do I clean the whole area that is surrounded by water?
For example, I'm going to do this.
I'm not going to let him move.
I've been to the sea for a long time.
When I came out of the sea, I was lifted up.
I'm in the middle of a garden.
I'm going to see Kay Man.
A series of things.
Gonjan is a mountain range that stretches all the way to the sea.
Or do you want to go back to the drawing board?
If you're looking for a large pack of things to plant, how do you grow them?
Donk, how do you want me to call you?
If men sit yo pa rele yo order jan again
I don't know how to call you.
It's not just me, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you
I ordered you not to re-release it again.
The men could tell me what to do.
As if I'm going to tell you.
I'm not sure if this is true or not.
There are no questions left to anyone.
Men are not allowed to take their own clothes.
Or wait for me.
I'm going to read it if I can understand it.
Yo rele lmen gen yo konn rele yo order chantou.
Good luck and I'll be back in the mountains.
Or I'll release it again
Either way, I'm going to order it again.
I can't wait to get back to you.
Or so it is.
I'm going down the stairs and I'm going down the stairs and I'm going down the stairs and I'm going down the stairs and I'm going down the stairs and I'm going down the stairs and I'm going down the stairs and I'm going down the stairs and I'm going down the stairs and I'm going down the stairs and I'm going down the stairs and I'm going down the stairs and I'm going down the stairs and I'm going down the stairs.
If you don't want to go down there, you can't go down there.
I'm going down to Sod and I'm going down to Sod and I'm going down to Sod and I'm going down to Sod and I'm going down to Sod and I'm going down to Sod and I'm going down to Sod and I'm going down to Sod and I'm going down to Sod and I'm going down to Sod and I'm going down to Sod and I'm going down to Sod and I'm going down to Sod and I'm going down to Sod and I'm going down to Sod and I'm going down to
I'm going back to the drawing board.
It's not even coming down to the top of the mountain.
Don't ask me if I can help you.
I know if I'm going down there.
There's no other way around it.
Other people don't understand what I'm saying.
I'm on to something.
It's not that simple.
Gen ou dwa sotan ba wab vini
The right to vote is the right to vote, and the right to vote is the right to vote.
But while I'm at it, I really don't need it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
How am I supposed to eat?
How do you know, how do you know, how do you know, how do you know?
An, we know?
For example, on a walk, on a hill, on a road that leads to a mountain.
Se konsya solmon yon rele li, but there are no more gen nou li.
Good riding around.
One of the most important things you can do is to plant a plant.
Men are two generations of all kinds of evil.
Or never see anything of it again.
Or two jade or nothing.
It's not like I'm going to release it.
Or to cut loads, or to make planks, or to do other things, if only there is a, what's the problem?
What's wrong with Ann?
Is everything going to be together with me, on the pitch, on the pitch, on the pitch or on the pitch?
Pa tou sa non yon
I'm also very happy with it.
I'm on my way.
And I'm going to sing it all together.
I'm going to tell you something I don't know.
I don't know about you.
It's been a while since I've been able to get out of here.
Now you'll be able to cash in on the money.
Or your kennichaden se bay sa yo only waffe
It's not all bad, it's all good.
It's just a matter of time.
I don't know if it's the right thing to do or the right thing to do.
Gen sa gen yo cut yo make a plan yo
Gen sa se keyou
It's only in the kitchen.
I'm going to call it a bay like this.
What you want to know is what you want to know.
This is why I'm so excited about it.
That's all right, only yo di
Typically, this is the case with the phone.
I'm all for it.
What is the meaning of life?
On the floor of the pot
The wine comes from a variety of sources.
There's no other way.
Or maybe you're just trying to get a car to run off the road.
Yo, and then I ran so fast that I fell to my knees, where I fell and fell.
That's the only way to call it, counting the new ones, an, se pa alò la, m pa, m pa konnit la.
Men, if the pond is too long on the flat, where I fall a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a.
I don't know men
It's either a pose or a pose.
I'm going to try to make it easy for you.
I don't know if it's a fall or something.
There are two ways to do this.
You're not going to let yourself fall, you're going to fall into something else.
There is no order to release it again.
For example, there are two ways to do this.
You can't go in or out of the house.
Or make the plough pay for the same amount of money in it.
What do you think about it?
If it is, is it, is it not, is it the same Moon, or is it not?
For example, you can plant a plant in an area where there is an abundance of oil.
They're on the ground.
When you're in the mountains, you're in the mountains, and you're in the mountains.
Kougou yon is not riding around or can be planted there.
They're really on the ground.
There are no plants or plants that can feed on the earth.
I'm glad you're here to help.
I don't know what to do with myself.
The test can be done at any time.
There are many ways to live your life.
You don't have to wear a big head like yourself.
Or you can give them a soda.
But the water is still there.
It's not the same water.
I'm going to do the same thing.
Did I move because I couldn't move?
In the medium-sized generation, they are moving.
I don't want to be in the water.
Or do you order them to be reborn again, or do you order them to be reborn again?
Bou, or do you want to eat it again, or do you want to eat it?
It's not like it's going to happen again or again.
A large amount of water is injected into the site.
One or two laps to do so.
What's the matter with you?
It's not the end of December, I'm ready.
For example, you don't know anyone who is so passionate about chemistry, do you?
I don't know how to swim either.
Well, don't you think that if you go down there, there are two things I can do for you?
The men are on the water.
It's not that I can't get past it.
It doesn't really happen.
The man or woman who is going to wash his face is going to be the one who is going to wash his face.
I'll wash them in the same water as I do when I wash them.
Gen de kote pa exant gen water
A water supply or a water supply system can be used to meet the needs of the water supply system.
Don't know where you're going to go from here to there, and don't know where you're going to go from here.
I can't wait to get through it.
You can go through a man who doesn't touch you.
Don't stop because you're walking or doing something.
Men don't have to go to the other side of the world to get a foot in the door.
I'm not going to touch you.
I'm going to touch you.
The men touched me.
Touch me with the same touch.
People don't talk about the top of their heads.
If you do or don't do well, you'll be fine.
Or at least you can stand up and beat yourself to death.
You will not be able to re-release the order again.
Anmen bon e don if you send me a message to re-release wap di se one se
Gende often La ou konn non water
How much water is there?
I know that Gonceride Timoun or Benyen is preferable to Benyen because it can plunge into the water.
You can't eat it.
I can't wait to get back to you.
So if you don't call me, I'm not going to call you.
Men are men.
There are people who will be living in this area.
I'm running and I'm going to get into it.
It's not the same thing.
There's a lot more to it than that.
There is no such thing as a phone.
You can't talk between two demons.
When the water falls, only water passes through it.
You may or may not want to have a child.
So much for the child.
It's not like I don't want to go to the bathroom or the bathroom.
I'm here to help you.
Now I know where the water is.
Men can pay exsanpon in this way.
Or in a bed with two drops of water in it.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I didn't hear anything.
In the meantime, there's a ton of people in the house.
Or foolish for the sake of the men who fell.
I can hear the sound of the sound of water.
You're not going to be able to eat or drink anything.
Open your mouth or your mouth.
Or on the other side of the bay again.
I'm very happy with it.
I don't know.
Or you desenn
I'm going to tell you a story.
Or forget about things like that or forget about them.
However, there is also the possibility that they will not be able to do so.
or to dim li
The water is coming down.
There is no such thing as a non a.
It's not like I'm saying anything.
or water debris.
A water bottle or water bottle can be used.
It's a great way to do it.
This is due to the fact that the tooth is brittle.
Or in the lap or in the lap.
Tooth decay is the result of a tooth decay.
If I tell you what I'm doing, what am I doing?
I'm in love with you.
I'm hoping for something timely and as if it's something special.
I can't wait to repeat it again.
What's up with the water?
I'm here to remind you, or I'm here to tell you.
For example, you won't find a place to stay.
There's plenty of water to drink, but we won't take it.
One person as if he were going to be in the same bay as your canlot so li
I can't wait to get to the big boats.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
Don't give up or I'll tell you what.
Water and water.
In the meantime, there is a water supply.
But if you don't take a bottle full of water, you're going to have to make a new wine.
Is this a re-release, or can I re-release it?
He is not a man or a good person to others.
Or good people other than you.
I'm going to tell you about demons.
Or repeat your teeth.
M is the base.
Now that's all there is to it.
It's a new place to be.
Men do not give up on the good of the world.
It's about taking care of yourself.
Take, for example, the falling tide.
It's the first time I've seen it.
A packet of luggage will be placed underneath your feet.
I wanted to take a picket to retire me, so I could get back to it.
What is the order of the gen gen yo rele sa?
Okay, here's the deal.
I don't know what to do about it.
Or do it or plap
Whether or not something is going down or down.
It's not like we're going to be able to keep up with them.
It's a two-way street.
When men are full of the labou, or when men are full of the labou, or when men are full of the labou, or when men are full of the labou, or when men are full of the labou, or when men are full of the labou, or when men are full of the labou, or when men are full of the labou, or when men are full of the labou, or when men are full of the labou, or when men are full of the labou, or when they are full of the labou, or when they are full of the
Se yon lagon
Se yon lagon sou antre or pap antre net non men or gen dwa kote yo bouye lont
or retrieve them.
Abè, what do you mean?
Take, for example, drinking water.
Or as much as a couple of drops of water in a bottle of water, or as much as a couple of drops of water in a bottle of water.
If you want to go to the bathroom or take water, go to the bathroom.
There's a lot more to it than that.
What is John's water?
And John drank the water.
Gen o kote or an pran lò gade water a
Whether or not it's true, it's true.
Or at the very least, you'll be included in the men's section.
Or take some water.
It's not water.
Obesity is a drinking problem.
In the meantime, take water.
It's a good idea to take some water.
It's not because there's a cold water.
Now a generation of people are going through a series of upheavals all over the country.
Everything under the canal or a series of things to be done.
to underwater or underground.
When you hit the ground, you're going to fall.
I'm not going to let you down.
Lemon, I order you to call me again.
Or to plant the bay la.
However, you know there's a problem.
Where there are two sides, they are grey, grey, but if you know how to make them, they are not full, they are not simple.
And, I don't know, I'm not going to plant the plant, I'm going to plant the plant.
Men, however, do not hesitate to plant the good game.
I know how to play the game.
People who don't know how to make a living from it.
There's something else.
There are people who know everything about you.
I know I've picked up a series of things to play pench on.
I'm not going to let you down.
How do you do it or how do you do it?
I can put it in the plamen or in the pouch or in the pie.
I'm ready for you to do it.
I can see your grandfather and grandmother.
You can collect repeatedly and you can call it a bay.
There are two ways to do this.
That's the way it is.
You're doing the same thing.
I've been waiting for you.
That's why I'm here.
I'm sure you'll be pleased if you keep it up.
For example, you can buy a new one or a new one.
I'm not sure if I'd like to do it myself or not.
As a teenager, he was forced to return to his native land.
There's a ton of stuff like that.
It's not like that.
It's a man's way of taking his own life.
Or do you know how to do it?
There is no water.
For example, if you're a white man, you're going to be a big fan of white men.
And you're going to have to clean the whole thing up and put it together.
You've got to take it easy.
I'm going to take it.
I'm going to tell you what's going on here.
Gen roch men all together loggade or di wou
It's such a beautiful thing.
Di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di warib lan di
I'm not sure what you mean.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
If all the men are together or if there is no one, then I am going to tell you the truth.
Soch yo men l ab
That's why I need help.
The men watched it all and put it all together.
Pre people yo konn rele order yon chan kanmèm
Reveal the order so that I don't know you anymore.
If you don't take it seriously, you can't take it seriously.
You can see a package together.
It's not like I'm going to release it.
You're going to have a lot of pity.
I've seen a lot of great series.
It's only a matter of time before they release it.
Look at things like this and look at what's going on in your life.
You know what I'm talking about.
It's a great way to get a feel for yourself.
Yon kond li, boche, or no sa sa sa sa sa, boche, u sa sa sa sa, gallet, or do you shout like that?
Or is there a new one, gallet, or is there a new one?
Or two, for example.
It's either a tea or a cup of tea.
When you are a good man, you are a good man, and you are a good man, and you are a good man.
But even when I'm ready to go, I'm ready to go back to my grandparents.
You can't get rid of it.
It has just appeared in two parts.
It's not just a matter of time or two.
I'm going to tell you what to do or what to do.
Or two ligons that are attached to a packet.
A branded package.
He put his soul into such a state of mind.
They're going down.
If you can commute with your feet or legs, you will not be able to do so.
A woman is a woman.
I'm in the great order of chan or kadil too
How many times do you know?
I know women.
Men are not allowed to.
Do you know what you're talking about, what you're talking about, what you're talking about, what you're talking about, what you're talking about, what you're talking about, what you're talking about, what you're talking about, what you're talking about, what you're talking about, what you're talking about, what you're talking about, what you're talking about, what you're talking about, what you're talking about, what you're talking about, what you're talking about, what you're
I'm going to take it.
I'm going to take it easy.
I'll be there in the morning.
I've got a lot of things going on.
Bon tijan yes
Li jann al pa rete thus
Li on tijan down
Down to the bottom.
I'm going to tell you a story and tell you how to do it.
They are known to be men.
They are men.
N ap rivon
Or know two people who have committed a sin.
There are two large boats on the water's edge.
There are a lot of things that people can do about it.
The man who knew yes stood in a corner.
I'm going to call it a day.
I know who lives in you and I know who lives in you and I know who lives in you and I know who lives in you.
You don't have to know.
Men are not allowed to go to the bathroom.
I'm going to give you everything you need to know.
I'm on my way to the bay.
I know you are well enough for seven days in the sea.
If you're at sea, you're going to have a lot of space.
I'm going to turn it into grass.
I've been waiting for you.
You know they're in the middle of nowhere.
If you're going to be able to get to the next level, you're going to be able to get to the next level.
We are the Boudmen.
I can't wait to see what you're up to.
I'm not going to say anything.
How do you know what to call it?
Well, how are you doing now?
I'm the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who
My grandmother and I didn't get along very well.
How did I get back to you?
Or do you or do you dim li, grass?
No, it's on the grass.
Well, now we have to ask each other a good question, for example, if there is another side?
There are two water genes.
Empi w ap explain yon person
The water is generated by the Koukouye gene.
I'm going to try to explain something to someone.
I'm so looking at the other side of it.
Li bezwon ka w ap di look on the other side of the lake.
I've been waiting for you to tell me about it.
Or can I get a spike?
Gen order jan w card l also
non-area here
I don't really need this area.
I'm so glad you're here too.
Take it or leave it.
It's not like I'm ordering anything.
M gen dwa a
I stood there.
How can I help someone who is standing in front of me?
Is it good or bad for the people of Kalyan?
Or, for example, by someone else.
One or two of these people are standing.
They're on their way to the top right now.
If you're in the mountains.
I'm not sure if I'm up to it.
I'm in the mountains.
I live in the midst of these people.
The people who want to be on top of the world are the ones who want to be on top of the world.
I'm going to the mountains.
Ay la monta
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do next.
Who's your soulmate?
Otherwise, you'll have to take a look at it.
There is no such thing as an exop in the mountains.
It's time to get to the bottom of it.
I'm not going to say anything about it.
I want to do the same as you.
Or to make people feel that way.
I'm going to get up and get up to the top of the stairs.
But I can understand why this is so, and why it is so important to me.
I want you to know that I'm still here.
It's time to get up to speed with what's going on.
They are at the end of the line where I can reach them.
They understand what they are reading.
W ap di l
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to make it.
So salt is salt again.
I don't know where I'm going to end up.
I'm not sure where I'm going with it.
I've been waiting for you.
I'm still here for you.
Men of the Negroes.
To understand what makes you a great guy is to understand what makes you a great guy.
Yo papè any
Any big guy can win a win and a draw.
With a big guy to do it.
to vape the earth.
They're too sorry or they're too late.
If you can't or won't.
You can't fall if you don't fall.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
There is no such thing as an Egyptian man who can meet an Egyptian man.
The men will walk in peace.
I can't wait to get there.
I understand that this is the way to go.
I've found myself in such a state of mind.
I wanted to be able to do that, but I didn't want to do that.
Men have made great strides.
There is a lot of progress to be made in this area.
It's a bit of a shock to the other side.
From the other side.
Repi from men woukadi Miche a
I'm not sure if it's true or not, but I'm pretty sure it's true.
I'm going to give you an order, and I'm going to give you an order, and I'm going to give you an order.
When a good man comes to Liwon and finds a way out, he answers.
Or to meet with them, or to walk with them in a new way.
Do it or don't do it.
It's only a matter of time before they do.
There's always a good way forward.
Or I could say I'm on a stick again
Pa igranm Non pralon kote
I'm going to do something about it.
I'm the only one who knows what I'm talking about.
You either know it or you will have it.
For example, I'd like to see if you're single or even single.
It's a good example of this.
But it's not just me, it's me.
Yes, I'm already going to go back to the drawing board.
In the future, I'll never be able to go back to the drawing board again.
For example, the people who are with you.
I'm on my way.
Prale is a new place.
The road is paved with good intentions.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
It's all about you and me.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
We are still men in solitary order.
I'm not sure if this is true.
They're far away and they won't be able to make it.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I'm sure you'll be able to use it.
I don't want to hear it.
In order to do so, I need to be able to come nearby.
Why do you think I'm drinking too much?
I'm going to make a big deal out of it.
I'm going to do it on the men's side.
I can't wait to hear about it.
I can drink wine from here.
I can't hear what I'm saying.
I can't hear you because I can't hear you because I can't hear you because I can't hear you because I can't hear you.
Don't be so hard on yourself, don't be so hard on yourself.
Their ears and ears fit well.
They can't hear you, but they can hear you.
For example, if you are a good person, you are a good person.
In the meantime, I'm ready for the album.
For me, it's all about men.
I don't know where to go in front of you.
Am I going to do it or am I going to do it?
The album is going to be a big hit.
It's going to be ahead of its time.
I'm going to do the math.
I can go ahead with a lot of orders before or after.
They are far away.
It's a new and exciting experience.
It's a new and exciting experience.
If I can do that, then I can do that.
I've come to this point.
I can tell you.
It's time to turn around.
It's like this
Good country where people know or yo dibò Okap
This is the Okap kit.
The key is Okap.
It's not like you're going to be able to do it.
It's about what's going on here.
It's not like I'm going to take it easy.
What are we going to do about it?
But sadly, are they still there, or do you know where they come from?
I don't know if I'll be able to make it or not.
It's the kind of person who knows how to work.
The people who know or have forgotten about it.
kijon or rele
Or else you'll find yourself working overseas.
Off the coast, you can work on your own.
Li yon up to your soul.
What's the key to the release?
Gen 11 men ride de kote tè a wouy
On the soul of the bouke
How do you get rid of them?
Or, if there is a mountain.
I'm here for you.
Enter the generic name or men's name.
If you take it or leave it, take it or leave it.
It's not like I'm going to be able to keep up with the same people.
They're either upside down or upside down.
Or you can see the mountain in my eyes.
The series is set in such a way that it works for you.
How do you call me?
No, if it's not, but wherever it works, how do you call it?
I know how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel, how you feel,
I'm working and I'm looking forward to it.
If I can do my best, I can do my best.
And I know what you're saying, Kol lakouche, who's sending you?
No, if it is on the granfon Sorèy la kouche gen la Sorèy la kouche, where l kouche a li, or on the other hand.
One or two days or so.
Do you think I'm going to be able to do this?
Chita la o chita is the name of the game.
Is it koto or chitto?
If I were to ask him where he was, he would ask me.
I want to know where I am and how I am going to get there.
I'm not going to tell you about Ken.
It's not even close.
I can't get enough of them.
I'm here for you guys.
Men or women can't stand the sight of you.
It's either around or on the side.
A good example of this is the road.
There are so many people out there.
Or two people who don't know the press and can't or won't.
I don't know what I'm going to do.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
Or I'm going to pass.
W ap di l Ale No men
The people behind the foundation are either behind you or behind you.
Or I'm going to tell him I'm going to kill him.
It is the Mèt Mache.
Let them pass it on.
It's like a kite or a kite.
I told you I wasn't.
This is what I'm going to do.
I know what I'm going to do.
They're also fans.
The child is going to go to the children's car and the child is going to go to the children's car.
It's a good idea to say goodbye.
Or say l: No
Or do you like me to do that?
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
We're not going to do that again.
It is derived from m la on bo la o o
The tankwab is the same as the tankwab.
You're the one who made me run away.
I can pass in front of the car.
or re-release it.
Oh, my God!
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
I'm not going to give you any more orders, Dad.
At three passes, an m pa gen order yon pa.
Please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please,
Open your eyes to the best of your ability.
Don't be fooled.
How to use your teeth.
It's all over the place.
That's how I'm going to pass.
That's how I got through it.
I've been through a lot.
I've been through Wimens.
I'm going through Gon bay and I'm going through wherever the car goes.
Al travèse is the case.
They crossed the road to E se sa sol mon Woukadi Or do not go back to Lodi.
Everything can be eaten or given to me.
If you ask me the same question, I'll ask you the same question.
Or you can cross the road.
I crossed the river to Sanpō.
They crossed the river.
They've been through it for a long time.
They crossed the river.
I don't know about anyone like that.
epi on men
By the end of the day, you'll be able to hear the adult's voice.
They make it easy for them to hear.
We're either going to do this or we're going to do this.
I want to be on time.
Or I'll sketch it out.
I'm going to call an anvas.
It's not like you're on a boat.
It's either men's or women's.
or pa gen order li
Or you can't read it.
Or I'll allocate it to an adult level.
I'm not going to lie.
There is no such thing as a free lunch, because I'm here to help you.
Dil Pou Sivi is on the road.
I've been waiting for this to happen.
Before crossing the road I could get to where the people were going.
We're all in this together, and we're all in this together.
They don't know what they're talking about.
For the sake of the road.
It's just a matter of time before you do it.
Or pral on chote
It's either that or it's that way.
That's the way I'm doing it.
That's why I'm here.
It's like that.
Men, if this is not the way, watch, if this is the way, or cross, if this is not the way, men.
Okay, but what's the point of it?
Do you want to find a way to stop it, or do you want to do something like this?
or make the road.
Do it or do it or do it.
or renmè trenvèsye
I'm really excited about it.
Or will be on the couch.
Parikizanp wop lè pral kote a
For example, if you have a
I've been lucky enough to be able to do that for a long time.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, grandmother, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you
Thank you very much Granmèt la
Thank you very much Granmèt la Men, can you continue to walk with me?
Consou pa continue to march as k win o
or pose because or in the lakou a
It's either that or it's that.
Or a child.
The children of Oulye M will not be able to see you.
I'm trying to figure out what I'm going to do.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to get in front of the door.
The ligade or two l'ap appear in the background.
What do you think of me?
Where am I supposed to be?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
Where you are, where you are, where you are, where you are.
Hey, what's up, where are you going?
Well, I'm going to tell you, but I'm not going to tell you.
I'm with you on the sea floor.
It's about the people who have lost their lives.
or where the ap appears.
There are two ways in which the app appears.
Or the Lord's Prayer.
When someone shows up, or when someone shows up, they're just like that.
It costs one or two quarters or both.
For example, if someone doesn't want to go to the bathroom.
They're dead again.
Someone comes and asks for a reason.
Ap di la.
There's nothing I can do to help people in their homes.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
One person, for example, is going to have to pay for it.
There are people who don't want to see a country.
They will go elsewhere as I do.
I'm going to ask for an interview and I'm going to call them somewhere else.
They're on the other side of the fence.
How many times do you know what to do with it?
I'm going to tell you.
They know what they're talking about.
I know that all men are very good men.
On a large scale or on a large scale or on a large scale or on a large scale, there is nothing that can prevent you from falling asleep.
That's the only way to call it a day.
I'm not sure.
I'll call you again.
I'm on my way.
No, yo gen order jan yo.
Once again I know how to call you, do you know?
I'm ready to go again.
It's either a li or a.
Prefè nou a prefè nou a prefè nou a prefè nou a prefè nou a prefè nou a prefè nou a prefè nou a prefè nou a prefè nou a prefè nou a prefè nou a prefè nou a prefè nou a prefè nou a prefè nou a
I'm not sure what I'm going to say.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you.
It's the only way I know how to play.
It's the end of the world.
You're going to do that.
Is it still hot?
If you have a good morning or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day or a bad day
It's not like it's happening right now.
Now there are eight men and children, for example, who are willing to give up everything they have to give up.
For example, a person who knows how to win a Chak jou bè
Today, today, today, today, today, today, today, tomorrow.
of men or women.
After a meal or a meal.
This is the man who did the same thing.
The people who came to me said, 'I'm going to do this.'
How do you know what I'm talking about?
There is no such thing as a free lunch or a free lunch.
The men's genome is small.
When a person falls asleep, he/she falls asleep.
men before yes
I'm not sure what to do about it.
Before the sun rises, the man rises to Achillel and rises to Achillel.
Li near to pral jouyi
5 o'clock in the morning or by order of jwon rele li
It's five o'clock in the morning.
I'm on my way.
One more order chan
You can do the same thing.
It's open to the public.
5 o'clock in the morning or we'll order Chan again
Four o'clock in the morning.
It's the first thing in the morning.
They're not together.
There is a lot of confusion about what is happening.
Or to be or not to be, I've been around for a long time.
I don't want to bring the effect so much as a.
They've been around for a long time.
They've been around for a long time, and they've been able to keep up.
I'm on my way.
Gen de lè, for example
You're going to have to go to work or something.
The sun has made its way.
It's hard to hear when someone is talking to you.
When the sun goes down, the sun goes down.
I've just been to the bathroom.
Or marry before devon or ki jan or konn rele dat sa
They are made for men who only know what they are doing.
They're all in the same boat.
I've been waiting for you to come up with something.
It's your sweet wine.
If you feel like it or don't feel like it, you can't do it alone.
Chouchouj Se cho o cho men sa k choice
It's hard to say what's going on.
It is the choice of men.
Rad la ki force or
It's not like we're going to force it.
The men were convicted and sentenced to be hanged, drawn and quartered.
The sun is shining on the farm.
Don't worry about it.
It's not about strength or weakness.
The sun is shining on the farm.
Do you want to know if it's true or not?
Take, for example, the law.
I'm going to do something like this.
on who you are and how you win.
It's the end of the world as we know it.
I'm going to try to get some tea.
Serve with cold water.
I feel like I don't know what to say.
I'm going to take something from my grandmother and I'm going to take something from my grandmother and I'm going to take something from my grandmother and I'm going to take something from my grandmother and I'm going to take something from my grandmother and I'm going to take something from my grandmother and I'm going to take something from my grandmother and I'm going to take something from my grandmother and I'm going to take something from my grandmother and I'm going to take something from my
Or an inheritance or something.
to the bottom of the path.
I've been waiting for you to call me back.
It's not like Levi Kouche.
There, but not before, or after, or before, or before or after.
Aski sòlèy kouche, paski and pou palimen.
And in the words of Mr. Li, what are you going to do about it?
We'll do something about it.
And then there's a new one.
Whether you want to or not, yes, why should I retire?
They're going to hear me.
I'm going to tell you what to do about it.
I don't know if I can eat it or not.
Are you ready for the men's team?
Jan or re-release the command again
For example, where or what to do about it.
Who's going to use your life?
I can't wait to see what I'm up to.
Or am I going to live?
In the morning, I was in front of you.
I'm going to live in the morning.
I'm going to make it up to you in the morning.
The water in the bay is compact and the water falls on the bay.
There is no longer any chance of water falling on your face.
How do I re-read the order and not re-read it again?
Goutyè was given an order not to call me back.
The tid lwa rap fell on my feet.
And then there's someone else again.
Let's work together to do this.
All the heavens and all the earth are covered with dust.
It's not like I'm falling out of the sky.
Cash or cash is a good thing.
Men or will order a card.
It's the first time I've seen it.
Or they'll do more.
They will do more.
Men or cards are masked.
The sky is the tounwa.
The sun is shining.
There is no such thing as sunshine.
The only thing I can say is that it's an aridonk or a di la.
I'd like to see the sun rise and I'd like to take the people.
Whether it's the sunset, the sunset, the moon, the sky, or anything else.
As you go down, I'm going down the stairs.
It's like a piece of cloth that's always there.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to re-read it.
You're the one who's got it all figured out.
The men who have been released from prison are the ones who have been released from prison.
It's not a big deal if you don't know how to fix it.
There is no order of one relay and there is no such thing as the same as I just came out of the relay.
I've just been outside.
I was born out of wedlock.
The order of yon ankon o
It's not just me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you.
Se konsya or kwonn di li
It's good to know how well you've been up to date with the latest news.
It's a great way to get to know each other.
I can fill in the blanks.
It's the same one.
It's almost as if I'm telling you.
The people who live there do not know whether they live in the country or not.
I don't know how I met him.
I don't know how I'm going to do it, but I'm going to do it all over again.
I know what I'm talking about, and I know what I'm talking about.
The order in which they are placed is always the same as the order in which they are placed.
Do you know what kind of plant it is?
I can't hear anyone saying anything about the new line.
I'm all about you, I'm all about you, I'm all about you, I'm all about you, I'm all about you, I'm all about you, I'm all about you, I'm all about you, I'm all about you, I'm all about you, I'm all about you, I'm all about you, I'm all about you, I'm all about you, I'm all about you, I'm all about you, I'm all about you, I'm all about you,
It's not like you're going to be able to do anything right or wrong.
It's the same with you.
I don't even know what's good for me.
It's been 13 months.
Thirteen good days are good for good practice in my life.
Or do you know
It's just that there are people who know how to pack a lot of stuff about you.
Do you know what I know about you?
What can I do for people?
What are the things that I know that I know about the good and the bad and the ugly we know about?
It's been a long time since I've had a good time.
Lalin and the men of the party.
They are part of the process of preparing for the appearance.
I've come to the conclusion that I can plant a plant.
I can't wait to see it.
I started to sin when I was a kid.
They're good.
When you're done with it, you're done with it.
The next day, he called me, news lin, Kléd lin still.
Well, do you want to go on, or do you want to go on telling me about your new lavinia?
It will be planted or will be planted.
I'm sure you'll be able to find a way to make it work.
It's not even close.
I know how to make wine.
I can't wait to get some wine.
This is an edel dekout dekout li
I've got a lot of wine in my pocket.
I'm sure you'll find some fine wine.
I've been drinking wine for a while.
The wine is very tasty.
I'm so tired of wine.
I've been waiting for the last few days for you to leave.
I don't know if it's true or not.
I don't know, for example, if you're going to do something like this.
There's nothing I don't know about today.
It's time to cut your hair.
You know I'm not a consul.
It's good to be back in the saddle.
I cut off the decou d'li
If you cut it off, cut it off.
Well, what's going on?
No, I'm sorry, but I'm not sorry.
Not only is it about something else, but it's also about the depth of a person's soul.
If you come here, you will come here.
Lap tann dat, lap tann dat is the wrong one?
That's why I'm here to help you.
That's what happened.
Only men can reach it.
It's the only way to get there.
That's what I get for passing.
It's been that way ever since I've been here.
They are not in full swing.
I'm here to fill the void.
They're not in the lowell line.
I was born in Louvelines.
What's the problem, what's the passion?
Does anyone know where to look for this one?
And who can't tell, who can or can't tell, who can't tell?
What's the point of politics?
I'm in the middle of something with a lot of people I know.
I don't know who you're dating.
The sun is shining.
It's like an apple.
This is a van.
Gen sek ovetan.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to fish or not.
I don't know if I'm a man or not, I just don't know if I'm a man or not.
There is no such thing as Chan Anpo.
No one can say for sure what I'm looking for, but I can't say for sure what I'm looking for.
I'm looking forward to seeing you here.
I've been waiting for you to come to me.
I've been waiting for you.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
It's in the sky.
I'm going to heaven.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to keep up with the bad guys.
I'm not sure if it's worth it.
The stars are shining, but they still do not turn.
Ap mache as si se bay yo
Yo tout color
It's not going to be heaven.
Understand myen sa m dou la
On a series of things I'm not sure about.
k ap bay
I'm going to go back to the mountains, I'm going back to the mountains, I'm going back to the mountains, I'm going back to the mountains, I'm going back to the mountains, I'm going back to the mountains, I'm going back to the mountains, I'm going back to the mountains, I'm going back to the mountains, I'm going back to the mountains, I'm going back to the mountains, I'm going back to the mountains, I'm going
I'm going to call it a day.
Don't be fooled by this line.
I'm going to re-release it and I'm going to re-release it and I'm going to re-release it and I'm going to re-release it and I'm going to re-release it and I'm going to re-release it and I'm going to re-release it and I'm going to re-release it and I'm going to re-release it and I'm going to re-release it and I'm going to re-release it and I'm going to
But even then, as a matter of fact, it's a given.
They're releasing it.
It's not like you're going to be able to make a living.
There's no other way around it again.
Everything you need to know.
I don't know if I'm going to make it to the next generation.
I know I know the color, I know I don't know the color.
Gen gen wouz
Gen gen blan
Gen tout kaletyan Yon tout tali te color
How do you know where you are?
I don't know how I got there, but how did I get there?
I don't know who you are.
So, for example, a birthday party can be a celebration of a birthday.
a gen vandit
I'm going to call Van another van again.
before briz o te bon mann deyay
Or don't know anything else.
And in the meantime, I'm going to have a good time at sea.
I don't know who you are, but I'm sure you'll get to know me.
I'm in the heat.
Men, I know I know, even if you're in a relationship, you're in a relationship with someone who's in love with you.
Or do you know how to use it?
or derived from it, or derived from it in its entirety.
They're doing a good job, for example.
Tan an on ti chan figil an on ti chan
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to get out of there.
I'm going to say goodbye.
I've never seen anything like this before.
I've packed up a lot of stuff.
You may not be able to find your own grave or your grandfather's grave.
It's up to you to take care of your soul.
I've got one more thing.
There is a series of things that happen when you fall or when you are in front of you.
Do the same thing or don't do the same thing.
You release me.
Only then do you re-release it.
What can I say on your big brick, what can I say on your big brick?
Loay Se Loay
Ellie fell on something that I still remember.
Don't let them get away with it.
If I fall for the things of Pierre, I will fall for them.
There is no other way to call them.
If Bri is born and we're not going to cry, who's going to cry?
By the way, if Bri, Louray, Louray don't, I'm not going to fall for anything else.
Pyè, what are you doing again?
So, for example, do you know if you're going to be a big fan, or if you're going to be a big fan, or if you're going to do something?
They're going to make a lot of noise.
They're going to make you a lot of men.
They're going to do something about it.
If you don't do that, you'll get it.
No more or less because I'm not going to fly.
They're going to make a van.
I'm going to have to do something about it.
They're going to do you a favor.
How did you get away with it?
Well, yeah, how do you know when a hurricane is coming or what?
or the sound of a hurricane.
Vwankou or pol mite pri mose te te are born
Things are breaking down.
The problem is not yours.
What caused the cyclone to occur.
What is the ultimate commandment of men, and what is the ultimate commandment of God?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
Is the water in the sea the water in the sea?
I'm not going to lie to you.
When the hurricane comes, people will know that there is no way to stop it.
to make the water fall.
It's like a hurricane.
I don't get two shots.
We know exactly what's going on in the other bays all the time.
I don't think you know what you're talking about.
When a cyclone strikes, it's too late.
I didn't get it, and I didn't get it.
I'm going to get what I can do.
to receive them.
I'm going to tell you about the typhoid fever.
The form of the poem that led to the creation of the poem in the form of a poem.
It can take the form of an alite, but it can also take the form of a leaf.
You can buy an occupation.
For one thing, it's not a big deal.
You can't buy an occupation if you don't want to.
It can be very useful for you.
Things like that can't be used.
problems with such things.
peneko la candy occasi
If you don't have water, you can make it water.
It can be made from water.
I'm going to have to go to the bathroom.
and ap bat ascereal.
It's like a salmon.
I'm a ton of people.
The luggage in the sky is of all colors.
before the pli appears.
It's not uncommon for people to show up.
How often do you know?
I don't know what to do with myself.
It's the only way to get rid of it.
I'm not sure if I'll ever live like this or I'll ever go to heaven.
It's all there is to it.
The colour is red.
The color of things is taken.
I know how it is in heaven.
Siel, when will it be celebrated?
Opunpwa, what are we going to do about it?
Okay, so what do you know about the soda and the lakanseel?
Have you heard of anyone who knows about your holiday?
Well, I've got my teeth.
On the assumption of the things I know, or the knowledge of the past.
What can I do to make the cut, and what can I do to make the cut?
I can't wait to see what you're up to.
How can you do that?
We didn't know anything about it.
Men are grenn only men
I can't wait to see you again.
I'm going to take a shower.
I'm going to take a knife and I'm going to take a knife and I'll take a knife and I'll take a knife and I'll take a knife and I'll take a knife and I'll take a knife and I'll take a knife and I'll take a knife and I'll take a knife and I'll take a knife and I'll take a knife and I'll take a knife and I'll take a knife and I'll take a knife and I'
There's nothing else I know.
mouvir tann vwal fè
Things don't fall into place to make your garden grow and you don't have to worry about rain.
For example, lapli ap falls.
Or stand under a foot bra.
You've got so much to do.
A series of people have fallen apart.
The key is to keep them warm and cold.
There are many types of men.
It's all in your head.
I'm not sure what's going on.
They're just a bunch of guys.
It is only in this case that everything is possible, and it is possible that everything is possible in general.
You are trapped in a trap.
They are trapped in a trap.
There's a lot more to it than that.
The prize is two-tenths of a pound.
The prize has fallen.
I'm sorry to disappoint you.
Two of them have fallen.
Or buy the flour flour flour flour.
I'm not going to waste my life.
It's not like I'm falling in love with you.
You don't have a plan for your people.
And we're going to use the flour.
Or take me to the mountains or the streets.
You're looking at the top of your head and you're looking at other things.
Come, and rise, and go up into the mountains, but what shall I do for thee, or what shall I do for thee?
The kitchen of yo re-releases again
I'm going to open it up.
So much for salmon.
This is heaven and earth.
to reach the sky or both.
Kab monte down yo
It's the only way to call them men.
Nanmen sa trivenen sel lafime l la
It's like drinking water.
I'm not going to live in Lafime anymore.
Or that it's a complete failure.
It's not like you're going to die and die.
Lafime, lift up your head and lift up your head to heaven.
Let's take the example.
It's all about you.
A new leaf or a series of things that will fall on your head.
The appearance of a person in an episode.
The wall of the new door appears as soon as it is repaired.
E, for example, can be used as a solvent.
What can you do when you have a preconceived notion of taking?
You are not alone, you are not alone, you are the Lord's servant.
or by the way of the Lord.
Or to hear it.
It's not a coffee shop, it's a coffee shop.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make coffee.
I'm sick of being sick.
I'm sick and tired of being sick.
I'm going to spend a lot of time with you.
If you want to know what I mean, I know how to do it.
I'm not going to do this again to get back.
I'm going back to being a doctor.
Dr Pi do convease the sege.
It's not a metaphor.
A lot, or two sheets, or two sunsets, or two sheets after falling, how do you know that?
I want to know what's going on.
Only zombies are known to exist in the wild, but they are also known to exist in the wild.
I know I'm a devil.
Zombi k ap prale emaz
Or the two more and the fish.
Zombi k ap prale wife of Alò
Or to plant a plant, for example, in the kitchen.
This is why I can't plant such a plant.
It is not suitable for planting.
I'm going to tell you a story.
I'm not sure if I can afford plantations.
If it is possible, and if it is possible, then it is possible.
Do you want to plant a new plant so that you can re-plant it?
Mwen kijou, epajou, kilè to me to call you.
So, what do you know about it?
I don't know.
Acre of soybeans are available on a first-come, first-served basis.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to do it again.
This is the beginning of May.
You're on my way.
In the meantime, we're not going to be able to make it to the end of May.
Gen on le, for example, se as si m ta di o.
Either that or two, or I can't even plant a plant that doesn't have anything to do with the times.
When the sun comes down, when does the sun come down, when is the sun coming down?
If so, what can I say, if so, to re-establish an era, which era will it be?
Whether it's hot or cold.
I can't wait to see it now.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to make it through the season.
What's the matter with you?
This is the first time I've seen it.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
There are two main reasons for this.
It's the same as A.
I'm going to start with you and I'm going to start with you.
A series of two-month sessions will be held in the living room.
Before the sun goes down.
The sun is setting.
I can't wait to see how it goes.
I don't know how I'm going to do it, but I'm going to do it.
When the sun rises, the sun will come down.
I'm going to make a living off of it.
I'm not going to lie to my friends.
Well, here, and at the end of the day, let's do all the work, let's make sure the sun goes down well.
That's how I know how to do it, how I know how to do it.
If the sun is shining, if the sun is setting, everything can be done.
Who is going to pay me when I'm not working as hard as I am, like I still am?
October, for example, is a time when the sun is shining.
Kouto lever the sun vin kouche
Now is the time for a long day to come, for example, when the sun is setting.
people in a short day.
What's wrong with you?
For example, non-lever Li never slept on the couch.
I've been waiting a long time for you.
It's been a long time coming.
Did you see it?
No, no, how long is it?
Here's an example.
I've known you for a long time.
How do you know if you're still a little young?
It's been a long time coming.
So what do you think?
I'm not even sure I'm going to be able to make it to the academy yet.
We don't even get to the end of October.
I'm going to make the soup.
I've been waiting for you to come back for me.
We'll be back in January and we'll be back in January.
I'll be back in January.
We'll be back in January and we'll have a few more to come.
I'm going to have to go back to the drawing board again.
Bason and you don't have to come
I'm sure you've heard of it before.
Vandre di sen kon to I fell on my feet.
Pre-avri sak vini
After that, I'll be back.
I'm ready for the next one.
I'm going to tell you about April.
I'm going to try to find out more about them.
Then there's April, and then there's April, and then there's April, and then there's April.
Have you forgotten, for a few minutes?
How do you know when you're coming?
Prejiyè, okay, all right, then why don't you come?
Previve once more, aprevive once more, today or can I start with you, or can I start with you, no, no, se yo chou, no you?
It may be that there are a few men who are not in your life.
Tayizanm today a ki jou
Pilot non jou wou know anpò
I wish I could come to the memory of men who will live to see the end of the world.
Gen on lèse se saboka
In addition to the man and the wine, there is no need to tell the story.
That's why we're here.
We don't know what's going on.
And we don't forget it because it's the day you were born.
I don't know if I can get a hold of this guy.
I don't know if I'm going to make it.
Kouzi se le mango pi yon reel is popped as a
It's not like I'm going to do anything.
You can't get away with it.
How do you know when to make a mango?
Or not.
You're going to be behind you for a long time.
We are not going to be able to talk to him about how we are going to be able to make a difference.
Se premier janje yo pa konn di lodi again
I don't know how I'm going to do it again.
Let's get together and live together.
Who's going to walk in your grandmother's arms?
Sawete yas granmou yo
yaswete yo bonjou
Welcome to the relay.
It's a good order so I don't know what I'm doing.
It's like a birthday party.
Or believe it or not.
I don't know how to order anymore and I can't tell you what to do again.
I don't know.
When was the end of Madigra, when is the present paradise, and what is the future of paradise?
Now that Madigra has passed away, a phone call has been made, right?
It's hard to believe that you're a real man.
Some of you drink and fish only those of you who eat.
That's not the case anymore.
I think I'm going to be able to pick it up.
This is the era of all men and women.
vandre disen le lè is one of them.
A couple of minutes later, I was able to get people to dance with me.
There are many things you can do to help those who know how to dance.
I don't know if it's a good idea.
Don't pop up before Friday.
I'm going back to the drawing board.
I don't know if this is true.
Men jou vandredi se depuis a re
I miss you so much, I can't wait to get back to you.
But there are others who know your orders.
Pa gen order yon again.
Okay, after I'm in Dlobenit, I'm going to have lunch on Sunday, then I'm going to have lunch on Sunday again.
It's a great way to get to know Deyò.
I'm going to call it an era.
This is the first time I've been to a depot.
I'm going to call it an era.
It's the first day of November or the first day of July.
M, M, I, I know how to call you, but I don't know.
I don't know if anyone knows how this is going to happen.
What is it, why are you still here?
If December 25 is the day you die, you're an elephant.
Well, December 25th is a man's day, isn't it?
There's no other holiday to celebrate again.
Salons or yo-yo are open for birthdays.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm going to tell you.
I said no.
genfet, mas, genfet, answit, answit, pi, birthday of m.
The two men were among the first to celebrate their birthdays.
Wow, it's all in your head, man.
Well, to know the difference, and to know the difference, for example.
There's a lot more to it than that.
I don't want to hear the words of an older man.
The men and children who grew up near the tanwon and the thing
For example, if you want to see an adult or a child, you can't see an adult or you can't see a child.
Ap di children men maled twice
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it.
I'm not sure if this is a good idea.
It's not for long-distance children to talk about.
Men are now children.
Okay, there's no other generation that can't have children right now, right now.
When children are born, children are born at the right time every day.
I'm so happy to be here.
How do I know I'm looking for a good one?
No, I'm not looking for a good man, but I'm looking for a good man.
Don't be afraid to ask for help.
If you don't want the right number, you'll have to go to the right number.
You're not going to be able to do anything about it.
It's the only thing I've ever known.
OK, well, e, gen, e for example, gen de moun yo.
Or together, depending on the circumstances.
For example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example, for example,
or vann miche epi
or vann plat sa a vid
Don't worry about it.
We're on the road now.
They're now on the verge of collapse.
Why am I getting married right now?
Am I right now?
They are now before me.
Or do se or dvin or now
Empi li yes yes or come or now
Or now anvann men are the same
Now they're not ordering anymore.
If someone asks you a question or two,
For example, if you want to know what you need or need, for example.
A president's speech to re-elect the legislature.
I was born.
Tell me about my birthday.
It's my birthday or not.
Or have something to do.
Two men or two men are coming.
It's not like I'm going to do it this way.
men or benzene that I know of.
Or even do the same thing.
It's now or never.
We're going to do it this way.
The kitchen is well equipped.
Kison wap di l
It's a great way to get to know your grandparents.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm going to do the same thing I want to do in the order I want.
I don't know if I want to or I don't know.
I'm going to do this for you.
I've been waiting for you to come back to me.
Because they want to do it.
I want you to let me know if I can do it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
Or a long time ago, if you like.
Lontan men two ske w ap in a
Tell me what you're doing now because you're doing it.
or b ap understand
I don't know what to say or what to say.
I've been doing this for a long time.
That's what I'm talking about.
Is there a general order of chan or ta kab di eee
about something that happened a long time ago.
What can I do for you?
What's the matter with you?
How do you know?
You can't tell me what to do.
There are people who don't know what to do or what not to do.
Who's going to get hurt again?
I don't know what to do with myself.
It's a story of struggle.
It's been a long time coming.
This is the church.
I'm talking about a series of people who don't live together.
I don't know how or when.
The men are pale from me.
The kitchen is very clean.
That's how it's done in the kitchen.
Or who's your expert?
If they want to talk about the same things as people who don't drink, they won't.
There are people who know you and you know who you are.
There's no one you know.
I don't know if I'm alive or not.
I'm not sure if I'll live long enough or not.
It's like someone else knows who you are.
It's not your lips.
I'm in love with someone like you.
Are they children's if they are children's?
What's the matter with you?
People who don't live long live with their children.
On the one hand and on the other hand, it's a big deal.
Do you feel good about people when you grow up?
Do you think that the elderly are more likely to be affected?
gwen people enmòsman yo
As if I'm going to tell you.
It's about the thing or the outcome.
It's the only thing that's ever happened to me.
It's the people who are in this situation.
Is there any law or regulation of these people?
It's not like you're going to be able to get home or anything.
I don't know who they are.
They are in the sanctioning process.
They don't want to hear about it because if something happens to them, they don't want to hear about it.
It's time to move on to the next step.
I'm going to pass it on to you.
There is no such thing as a good man.
It's not like I'm going to be here or anything like that.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to preach.
I'm going to do it again and again.
It's been a while since we've seen this happen.
It's been a while since I've been here.
I'm not the only one who feels this way.
Or don't tell me what's going to happen to anyone else.
You're going home.
I'm not sure what's new.
or of these people.
I'm going to prezen it.
Or I'm new to it.
I'd like to get back to my house.
or bon bakay
Or in front of the new.
I don't want to be at home anymore.
I'm going to give you guys a chance.
They're not going to be able to keep up with us.
I'm in the mood for something new.
Well, now, on the one hand, you've got a job to do, but they're comforting.
Or take the time to do the work that needs to be done.
I'm going to tell you whether or not you're doing the job.
There are seven men.
All the work has been done.
Or take a day off to do or need to know or do something about it in the morning.
I'm going to tell you this from the morning.
In the meantime, we're going to have to do something about it.
I'm working on a good card.
A good card.
I've been writing since I was a teenager.
I know I've been around a few times, really.
I know what you're talking about.
It's not like you're going to lose weight.
I'm going to do it.
On w ap mache
A car accident or accident at a birthday party.
An accident and a final celebration.
epi or ale epi
or ankontre on moun
Or do it or explain it.
on things that need to be celebrated.
Or need to give it to the new party.
If someone is born, what is the date of birth?
Have you had an accident recently?
No, I don't want to talk about it, but I don't want anyone to hear me.
Or is there a fashionable way to celebrate a new holiday when I don't know why?
Wi men, or of these men.
The thing I've just heard is that you're not in an accident.
I'll tell you what I mean.
or kòmans men
Or will you say
Can you tell me?
I've just been in an accident.
It's now the only thing that's happened.
You've just celebrated your birthday, but I'd love to have something else to say to you.
Or do you say it's too late?
Talè a yon atidan has just celebrated.
Afterwards or after something else.
If you don't know anyone, if you don't know anyone, if you don't know who you are, if you don't know who you are, if you don't know who you are, if you don't know who you are, if you don't know who you are, if you don't know who you are, if you don't know who you are, if you don't know who you are, if you don't know who you are, if you don't know who you are.
You can even write a letter so that you can be proud of what you're going to write.
I'm going to run and I'm going to run for office.
You can get away with it or run away with it.
Or you can't get married again.
It's time to run the prese race.
I've been waiting for you to get to Rome.
Or run away from the river.
Or I'll say it again.
They are pressed on the net or they are pressed a depalim mez so that they can be sent to the person.
For example, they do the same thing.
They appear to be grangou
The grangou need to let people know.
For example, at three o'clock in the afternoon.
It's going to come out in the morning.
They don't need anything.
There are people who are in a hurry to do it now so that I can give it to them.
Is this how I feel right now?
They know their mates and their men.
There are two or more of them.
If you're looking for someone who needs help today, you'll need someone who's been with you since I was a kid.
The order cannot be placed again.
The order has been deleted.
I've got two wines.
Okay, confide in me, I'm going to talk about something else.
It's not a question of who he is.
to see you and your wine.
Today, I'm going to tell you.
I've been saying that since yesterday.
Madi, or I want you to be sick, or I want you to be sick.
For Madi's sake, I can't go back to Madi or being sick.
If Madi or wine are two or you're sick.
Men are not ready to get sick.
I've been working on it ever since.
Or order you to do it again.
We've been working on it ever since.
I'm going to ask you a question.
If you're going to ask me, I'm going to ask you.
Since the blood has passed through the men.
They're going to spend money on you.
It's been a while since I've been able to do anything since Madi.
There's a lot of people here.
People who don't know what to do with Madi, then they're going to die.
Who is your mother, Madi, isn't she?
If not Madi, I'll give you a drink, a drink, a drink and a drink.
But when they saw the passers-by, they thought twice about it, and said, "I'll see you there".
Men, you want me to know.
If this happens, but it doesn't happen, if it doesn't happen, if it doesn't happen, what do you do?
I've had a lot of bloodshed.
Let them pass you by.
I'm sure you've heard of it.
I've been through it.
I've been waiting for you.
I've been writing since the beginning of the year.
about something someone else can do for you.
There's nothing I can do today.
Si non pran jodi jedi
It's Friday or Saturday morning.
They don't want to talk about it because they don't want to talk about it.
You're either good or bad at what you're doing.
I understand well that people don't want to do things the way they do.
I can be anonymous today.
Why can't we?
I'm going to do something about it.
I'm going to ask you a question.
I'm going to tell you what I can do.
It's not too late.
It's because you're passing through.
If so, I'm going to pass.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
What do you think they're doing?
It's not like I'm dying.
It's not like I don't have a lot of money.
We don't know if we're going to be ready or we're not going to be ready.
or vol redi
I can't do that on a Friday if I don't want to.
If you don't know what I'm talking about in the morning, I'm not going to be able to do it.
That's why I'm here.
I'm not sure if I'm ready for it.
There's no way I'm going to be able to do it.
It's the first day of the week because it's Friday.
If you're on a Friday.
That's what I'm going to tell you.
I'm going to say no. I'm going to say no.
I don't know what to do about the quantity of donations.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do this or not.
We've got a lot of people who want to do this on Saturday.
It's not like we're doing it on Saturday.
If I'm going to talk to them, what are you going to do?
When someone is going to get married alone.
The people who are going to get married are going to get married.
Before the wedding ceremony, the couple were married.
A new generation is born.
It's a celebration of the people.
I've been drinking and drinking for a long time.
It's not like he was born on Christmas Eve.
Even if it's not enough, it's not enough.
The festival of trisal is celebrated here.
If you want to know what my birthday is, then I'm going to celebrate my birthday.
A birthday party is a celebration of a person's birthday, for example.
It is not possible for a person to be able to communicate with the other person.
They say something.
I'm not going to tell anyone about it.
Hey, let me know again.
Tell me something that will make me want to know again.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
to make your mouth or wound.
I'll do it with your purse, never again.
No, not again bigawou, so dil pigawou.
No, it's not like I'm going to be able to make a living off of these people.
Bad non man chief does for sou bouchou bigawou an.
If you understand me well.
Or have something to do with it.
If you're going to do it, you're going to do it.
Or need to let the person know the first thing to do.
I can do it.
It's not a.
I'm sure you'll be able to use it in this way.
I don't know how to express myself in ecstasy.
I'm going to tell you what I can do and what I can do.
Let's not pass them on.
men or pa can di l on order chan again
I'm going to tell you how to do it.
It's not a man's fault.
I don't know how to make it so interesting.
I'm not going to do what I'm going to do.
If you don't know what I mean, you know what I mean.
I don't know what I'm going to do.
If you have a code, you will code.
Li pa kab as if you were going to code the code.
I've done a lot of things before before and before I've written the code.
I'm not going to say that I don't want to drink wine at home.
Men are not allowed to go to their homes.
There are many other things to do in such a way.
Do you have two interfaces?
If you want to know if you're drinking wine at home, you can do it at home.
They're just a few miles from my house.
You'll need to let the person know who's coming home.
It's almost chariz or so.
I'm not going to drink wine.
On the other hand, some people, for example, use wine at home.
Today's vinyl vinyl is available in a wide range of packages.
on order jou l vinyl fon packet an bon epi
Does anyone drink wine at home often?
And then there's the wine, and then there's the wine, and then there's the wine, and then there's the wine, and then there's the wine, and then there's the wine, and then there's the wine, and then there's the wine, and then there's the wine, and then there's the wine, and then there's the wine, and then there's the wine, and then there's the wine, and then there's the wine, and then there's the wine, and then there's the
Where is the wine in my house, in my house, or who can give it to me, where is the wine in your house?
Li vin at home or from my lips so, mwen an, anlèv pe li, ya vin sevan, only so or ka li, m, afwa so.
I'm a man of many talents, but I'm not a man of many talents.
Or are we going to eat takadi again?
I'm going to be a big fan.
There's always something to do.
I can't wait to see who the alphabet is.
Two or more people don't want to be in a position to talk to each other.
Is there anything I can do to save my life, and how can I do it?
I'm going slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly, slowly.
What's the big deal, you know?
Have something or someone else do it for you.
If men do or don't do the same thing.
This is the one who did it.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it to the end.
These are the men I'm going to put on the train.
Are you going to do things quickly or well?
They're more like men.
I can't take it for granted.
Take your facts.
Or a child's bay.
Mengade or gado two children yo all now yo la
Mom or rayi tanp pa mando or
Are the children now w ap di non yo
I'm going to tell you right now whether you're a man or not.
I don't know if it's now or later.
It's not just me, it's you.
I've been drinking wine since I was a kid.
Or is it an invitation to someone like me to be so kind to this guy?
There are two types of men.
It's so hard for me to get through it.
It's been a long time coming or something.
There is only one person who can read it.
If I hadn't been there, I wouldn't have been able to get through the door.
If you don't mind, I'm not going to go through this door.
I don't want to be in your shoes.
I've been to L..
There is no such thing as new.
If someone like this, for example, two people in a row can't walk through the door.
In the meantime, I'm ready for you.
or by the gen of man in the takadi li
I know who you are and I know who you are.
Now or later, I'll tell you.
If you want to be a part of it, you must be a part of it.
Because this is not always the case.
I'm not a big fan of it.
I'm going to tell you a great story.
I'm not going to say it again.
They're as big as big boots.
The end of the world will come to an end.
I can't wait to see you again.
Even though I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
Di non Mèt Diwi, e pa pa yo di Sa koton, man other bay la, m detande, m pa know, m detande la, a?
It's all about health.
The condition can lead to illness.
It's the only thing that makes you happy.
It doesn't have to be that way.
The men are now dead.
I'm going to tell you.
I'm sure you'll be able to use it for a while.
Or won't have anything in your package to give you.
Or for a guy who's my brother in law.
I'm going to tell you what happened to the door.
That's how I'm going to make a bottle of them without hitting a button.
I'll give you an example.
I'm going to give you a break.
He is a man.
Or understand, yes, they will.
It will be as if I were going to die.
The men are still in the cabin.
They're not big enough for both of them.
Tone of man as if I were to say w
I'm not going to give up on you.
They are looking for someone who is short-sighted.
The men and women of the wine grandil will be short again
It's time for people to grow up.
I'll tell you how to do it.
I don't know.
This is not a problem.
There's nothing wrong with that.
Sallem Nou sa li li is also known as li li li.
There are no people.
They're short, they're short, they're short, they're short, they're short, they're short, they're short.
After that, what do you want me to do again, if you want me to do it again?
Or they'll know again.
I'm going to tell you about choukets.
I've been ordered to do it again, but I can't do it again.
Or they'll know what they're talking about.
It's the same generation of people.
There are two types of yes.
I'm a member of the family.
I don't think there's anyone in my family who likes to watch it.
I'm sure you'll find someone who can help you.
It's not about who you are.
men or pa kon nou
Great people dance, great people dance, or don't order anything.
It's not going to happen again, is it going to happen again?
Moun, bo, go, or nou, or nou.
Either the people who come, or the people who come, or the people who come, or the people who come, or the people who come, or the people who come, or the people who come, or the people who come, or the people who come, or the people who come, or the people who come, or the people who come, or the people who come, or the people who come, or the people who come, or the people who come, or the people who come, or the people who come, or the people who come.
I'm going to try to get my money's worth to go to sleep.
Non non lò meton senti one
or on the order of jou an rel lankò
It's a good thing we're not alone.
It's not a big deal.
There is no one else.
There is no one to blame but me.
I'm the big guy in the doorway.
Men are a series of men.
We, if only we knew, we didn't know, didn't we?
I'm the one who's going to kill you.
There is no such thing as a human being.
We're not the only ones who've seen it.
A couple of people know each other very well in a short period of time.
It's about the people and the people.
It's about a guy.
Since the end of Mchèl filè yo can do it for you.
I don't want to know why I won.
I don't know anything about it.
No, li kase defo l win, li figi li vay lògade li li people who enmen the face of yo di, face looks like an adult face?
When the face looks like an adult face, I know it's long.
I'm not a guy.
For example, people in situations where people are chasing them are too far away.
This is a very good solution.
I can't wait to get my hands on it.
All men and women are not in love.
Why don't you love me?
How do you know I'm not in love with you?
Or am I not in love with him, and why am I not in love with him?
Se figil yo gade
I'm not going to lie to you.
Let me take you to something else.
Before, if they want to, why do they want to?
If you don't have a lot of money, you're going to have a lot of money, and if you don't have a lot of money, you're going to have a lot of money, and if you don't have a lot of money, you're going to have a lot of money, and if you don't have a lot of money, you're going to have a lot of money, and if you don't have a lot of money, you're going to have a lot of money.
I look at the face of everyone since they both are behind me.
The good and the bad are the same person for the top figure in the Gen people Seride people
It's a two-way street.
What do you think about it?
Gen zanti pa konn re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re
If you have an order, you'll be able to call the person you know.
It's a domain name that I'm allowed to use.
I can't put my finger on it.
It's not always easy to understand.
For example, if a person wears a pair of shoes, the person wears a pair of shoes.
How did I get the feeling?
It's a feeling to be alive.
I've come to the conclusion that I'm not going to be able to do anything about it.
If I hadn't, how could I ever have children again?
It's not that bad, it's not that bad.
If you're a sheep or a goat, you're a sheep.
Is this the only way you can call me, or is this the only way?
Wi, or li donmaje men, for there is no longer an order to call you?
The concert people I'm going to do is turn around like this.
I can't wait to get my hands on it.
He loves people.
In the meantime, he's going to be the next big thing.
Or two or three.
Or two rays sa
How many times have I met such a man?
They can be found in a number of books.
There is no separation between them.
Now, now, now.
Well, don't be fooled by men or as men or as boukle li, don't be fooled.
I'm not riding a horse.
I'm sure you'll be pleasantly surprised.
It's not like I'm going to use it in one form or another.
When I finally passed through the disease epi
I'm going to do something about it.
How do you know what to say and what not to say?
The people of David.
Oh, and a kiss with David?
Well, don't you see, don't you see?
One of the figures is David.
Donk two, donk two, donk two, donk two, donk two, donk two, donk two, donk two, donk two, donk two, donk two, donk two, donk two, donk two, donk two, donk two, donk two, donk two, don't you?
I've come down here, but I've never wanted to do it.
Don't look at me like that.
You've got a face and a face.
Wifigil wine down but if m ap know figs and rice
Don't look at the face.
A wine may also be added to the wine.
I'm going to tell you what to do with my face and I'm going to tell you what to do with my face and I'm going to tell you what to do with my face and I'm going to tell you what to do with my face and I'm going to tell you what to do with my face and I'm going to tell you what to do with my face and I'm going to tell you what to do with my face and I'm going to tell you what to do with my face and I'm going to tell you what to do with my face.
In the end, don't give up on the things you don't want to do, or don't give up on other things you don't want to do.
Or I'll figure out how to do it.
Li or limeg in the figure l
I'm going to tell you about it.
They're not going to be able to do anything about it, and they're not going to be able to do anything about it.
It's easy to see how these men and women are doing together in such a way.
I'm going to use it for the rest of my life.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
The men are in the picture.
Good for you.
They are the same as Nou Bèt.
There is no other way to worship the Lord freely.
On my account.
Wi, face to face, face to face and face to face.
When I order you again, you can say, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good.
Yo-yo, how do you make it clear that everything is wrong, wrong, or wrong?
We're going to smile, we're going to smile, we're going to smile.
Laugh and laugh, or, you know, laugh and laugh.
I don't want to hear a smile on my face.
Good luck with what you have to say as a Jew.
As a Jew, I was a Jew.
I'm very happy with it.
I'm not going to say it again.
It's a smile on his face.
as a Jew.
men or pa gen order chan ankk or ka di sa
Do you know how to make someone smile?
What's the order?
He smiled and said, "Aben, repeat this to me, you know?"
Li, on the other hand, are they still alive, or are they still alive?
Bon, bon, yeah, goukounyuni la se sa sa, li yon yo ro ro sa?
Well, do you ever think about something you know about and swap people's mouths with your mouths?
Goldye bouch la long, goldye bouch la poud?
And then I said again, do the mouth, do the mouth, do the mouth long?
Even if you don't want to do it again, I'm going to order it again, I'm going to order it again, I'm going to order it again, I'm going to order it, I'm going to order it, I'm going to order it, I'm going to order it, I'm going to order it, I'm going to order it, I'm going to order it, I'm going to order it, I'm going to order it, I'm going to order it, I'm going to order it
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm here for you.
It's all about the genesis.
It's not like I'm talking to people who don't know what they're talking about, but I'm talking to people who don't know what they're talking about right now.
Now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now,
I smiled at him and said, "I'm sorry".
I've been waiting for you even after that.
It's the people who are the longest men in the world.
Or you say I'm dan long
You can't do anything about it, you can't do anything about it, you can't do anything about it, you can't do anything about it, you can't do anything about it, you can't do anything about it, you can't do anything about it, you can't do anything about it, you can't do anything about it, you can't do anything about it, you can't do anything about it, you can't do anything about it.
I know how to do this.
But when I see you, I'll do what I do.
I don't know how I've been an animal before.
Now I know that you've got a lot of work to do or I've gotten ahead of you at the residency.
It's how you call a person and, for example, take it.
There are many great men.
It's a man or two.
They don't look like someone who is well-versed in lacrosse.
How do you make someone like a suitcase?
I don't want to eat anymore.
You can't be the only one with a suitcase.
I don't know if someone is too tall or too low.
Men are simply or not too big.
They're too much stuff.
I don't even have a suitcase.
Men or women can order a cup of coffee.
Okay, that's all right.
Consya with Enit
I'm not sure how I'm going to handle it.
That's the thing about you.
How do you get rid of it?
Or do you know how to know how to do it?
When you win, you win, you win, you win, you win, you win, you win.
Don't be fooled by this site.
Don't worry, I'm going to have a genetic disorder.
What's the point of hearing and hearing?
I've heard a lot, but how do I know what I'm talking about?
If I hear you, I'm going to the bathroom and I'm going to the bathroom.
Or do you know a man's hair?
Before I was born, I wanted to be a man.
It's good to be able to do something about it.
What do you know about me?
I'll be there for you.
He knows how many times a person has to give up his or her life.
I'm not sure who I'm talking to.
We have the right to be together, and we have the right to be together.
So, what's the big deal about fighting again?
If you're the one who's been there, how do you know who I am?
It's great to be back.
And then there's another one.
After that, I don't know, I can't stop.
If we can't keep up with such an account, what can we do about it?
I won't be a princess for too long.
Once upon a time, was that still the case?
Yes, once you know you're not going to be able to do it, but you're going to be able to do it.
Have you heard of your great-grandfather in the past?
What if I've never done anything like this before, or know how to do it, or how to do it?
Now that you've got it, you've got it all figured out.
I don't know what I'm doing right now.
I don't know about you.
I'm looking for a few rooms.
I'll tell you what I know, but I don't know.
I don't want to make you think about what's going on here.
It's either me or Li.
There's no other model I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again.
If you know where you're looking, you'll want to know who you are.
A lot of people either walk or don't know how to walk or don't know how to walk.
I know how much money you're going to get.
You don't know what you're talking about.
I know who they are and what they are.
Jan pe fal ramye
We've got a lot of people who want to do it.
It's a man's way of life.
What is it like to walk in a woman's footsteps, and how do you walk in a woman's footsteps?
I'm going to make a new one.
Or do you know?
People are going to get a good answer if I walk like this.
They're doing very well.
It's very good.
O konn bay yo mache
To whom and how to walk again?
Mache rale Koun ordered no more people to walk.
It's not a problem.
It's not as formal as it used to be.
WAP is now in its final form.
The app is available in three formats.
Even if it is not enough, it is not enough.
I'm going to tell you about a man.
There is no such thing as an outsider.
Men who are or even who are not.
This is not a formal application.
I'm going to tell you a story.
It's not a bad rap.
I'm going to take a photo of myself and I'm going to take a photo of myself and I'm going to take a photo of myself.
That's the only way I'm going to be able to replicate photons.
You know what I mean.
I'm here to tell you how to order chan.
That's why I'm here, and I'm here, and I'm here, and I'm here, and I'm here, and I'm here, and I'm here, and I'm here, and I'm here, and I'm here, and I'm here, and I'm here, and I'm here, and I'm here, and I'm here, and I'm here, and I'm here, and I'm here, and I'm here, and I'm here.
So, what's the catch?
You're going to have to figure it out.
You don't want to order another one again.
It's not like I'm taking medication.
If I'm going to do something wrong, if we're going to be together, who's going to do it?
I'm the one who's looking at the big picture.
There's a lot of people out there who've been through it.
Or of those who are on the horse.
The people of Egypt and the people of Judah came to Egypt.
Or recrijan i know you again.
Do you know what you're talking about?
I'm going to tell you what I know.
I don't know if it's true or not.
I can't wait to get on the boat.
Or they don't know what they're doing.
In the meantime, I know what I'm talking about.
There is no such thing.
It can be either a deck of playing cards, a deck of playing cards, or a deck of playing cards.
Do you feel like a boss?
What do you think I'm going to do again?
If you're going to support it like this, then you're going to have to.
I've always been this way.
There are people who want to be friends with the coaches.
It's not like I'm going to be a coach.
Li lan vireven
If a man's ears are touched,
Men repeat it to me.
Son zòrèy lanven.
Onm pati ki ann dan an
And then there's Ann and I.
They've taken it all in this way.
How do you get back to me?
Ele Blanch, blanch!
Or is it just me?
Wi, blanch yo blanch.
Wi men, of course, I'm going to be a man too.
I've got a lot of wine in my pocket, but I don't know what to do with it.
It's all white, huh?
It's a great way to get involved.
It's a great place to start.
Men are born this way twice.
I know what you're talking about.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I don't know how to do that.
I'm not sure.
Or do you think I'm the only one who knows what I'm talking about?
Or the colour of the horses, right?
Do you know who I am, or do you know who I am?
Who are you?
I'm sure you'll be able to find out what I'm talking about.
It's just a matter of who I am.
We have a chance to make a difference in people's lives.
And then there's the genesis.
Do you want to know who you are again, or do you want to know who you are?
What do you say, Jan San ble I just wanted to do with what I did again?
I'm sure you'll find a lot of people who've been there.
I listened well to the order, and I did it.
You've got a lot to eat.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
Can I do this again?
If you don't know what I'm talking about, why don't you?
It's too much and not too formal.
I don't know what to do about it.
But if you don't, you'll learn to love each other.
Men or women can't say they won't or won't quit their day job.
I'm not sure if it's true or not, but I'm sure it's true.
I'm a man of many talents.
It can be re-released as a single.
I'm here to help you.
Why is it so hard to see you?
Okay, how did you see it?
How long will it take?
Lòmen, I have sinned in such a way.
Gen w ap is an an an
I'm not sure what the plan is.
I'm not going to repeat this again.
I'm not sure who they are.
The order of chan ankwo ka di li
The men didn't come to me.
And then there's the gen order again
It is a sin on the tongue.
I don't know the concept of a bay sa orishan anymore.
So many people are dying of hunger.
There is no such thing as a free lunch, or even a free lunch.
It's not just the people, it's the people, it's the people, it's the people, it's the people, it's the people, it's the people, it's the people, it's the people, it's the people, it's the people, it's the people, it's the people, it's the people.
Don't be afraid to ask for help.
If you're going to do it, I'm going to do it.
There are others who are not the same as you.
After a while, I thought, well, don't worry about it.
The men underneath are the ones who know how to re-release the old antique.
Repeat it again.
If you're going to be able to do that, you're not going to be able to do it.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
I'm going to get rid of them.
It's not like I'm doing anything wrong.
It's my mouth.
It's not like you're going to get it right.
I don't want to draw another one.
Good men are good men.
What is kri kri krenn grey?
Is this how you do it?
No, yo, so, kri kari krenn gre?
Who do you think you are, and where are you?
And then there's your place.
Friend of men dressed as yo
Krenn is the king.
It's the same as the one in Maras.
And how good is the son of Dan and his children?
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it.
This is a great opportunity for you.
It seems to me that there is no such thing as a person who is sick and sick and knows how to deal with it.
Re-release me and me
There is no denying that there are things that people can do to make you sick.
One person says everything about me.
One of them is releasing it.
It's a win-win situation.
The man named Mazour is a man who has the right to speak his language.
Contone li a jou yo men, kon di man is Mazour a, kabrina, the rache.
It's hard to say what's wrong, but it's hard to say what's wrong.
No matter, for example, what do you do when you fall down?
If you are a man or a woman.
I'm not sure how much I'm going to be able to afford it.
I'll give you an example.
I'm going to do something about it.
I'm going to throw it away and I'm going to re-release it.
If you can't even get the ball, what can you do?
One series of people's generations.
It's not until you've seen it.
For example, there are seven times a week before the same thing happens.
How am I supposed to live?
These people are self-inflicted wounds.
Or do you think we do?
You don't even know where you're going with your money, do you?
The order jan anpò card li gen
You're going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be
The head is white and the hair is white.
I'm in charge of the order.
What kind of credit card is it?
Do you know why?
I don't know anyone I know.
Li Kouré is the only one who knows me every day now.
head or in the cellar.
Don't get too caught up in it.
Atet li ton or lan
It's not like we're going to talk about it.
There's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
You know how many people have heard of this and how many others have known about it.
I don't know what to do with my hair.
You've got a lot to do with what you've got and what you've got to do with what you've got and what you've got to do with what you've got and what you've got to do with what you've got and what you've got to do with what you've got and what you've got to do with what you've got and what you've got to do with what you've got.
Or goodbye to you
What's good for you, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know
You don't look like that.
You don't have to wear your hair.
That's why I'm here.
I'll take it from there.
That's my grandmother's hair.
Hair loss is not a problem.
I told you I was going to be your daddy.
I spent my life enjoying my hair when I was young.
I knew I was going to have to do it once in a long series.
Who do you think you are and how do you know?
I've always wanted to do this.
You've got your hair cut.
I'm not going to tell anyone about anything.
I've been waiting for you.
They're trying to make a difference in your life.
I don't know how I'm going to do it.
And that's because it's so good.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that, but I'm sure I'm going to be able to do that.
I don't know how I know what to say.
I can't wait to see what you're up to.
Chevote is a teapot.
Men like you are not one of them.
The men are still in their hair as if they were going to die.
on the ban on yon bò isy
I'm not going to say it again.
If you're looking for an example, you'll be able to tell me, or I'll be able to tell you.
What's the matter with you, what's the matter with you?
What's the matter with you?
Do you know what I'm talking about?
Don't get me wrong, I'm not a big fan of being born that way.
If I don't call you again, I'm not a chap.
Or do you know who's going to be the boss?
Yes, but we're talking about a series of things that people who know the gate quickly come to know about.
Who's the one with the knife?
So I'm going to re-release, re-release, launch before the child is born, re-release the child.
It's a series of guys who are so excited about the whole thing.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
I can't help but wonder.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it.
I've been on the road for a few weeks.
And so only rhodi li can win.
There is no order.
Don't get too caught up in the past.
Ready and ready to go.
How do you get to the top of the world?
I've never seen anything like it before.
How do you get to the top?
You've got a lot of people on your side.
Good riding for people.
I don't know if you're the color of that person.
The colour is the same as the colour.
I don't know how I'm going to make it.
I don't know who you are.
I'm going to tell you all about it, I'm going to tell you all about it.
Everything is sousi yo blanch
It's called grimel.
It's not like I'm grilling you.
I've always wanted to be a grim reader.
That's how I got back to it.
Wiplim jil blanch
That's how I feel.
Is grimel yo se tout grimel
That's how it is.
It's not just me.
Whether it's cold or cold, we don't have anything new to offer.
Yes, no one has a pet, ouwe, enpil wouj, on many wouj, bon yo pa konn di albini.
Or to voyeukòw sa yo pa ken in such a key a
I know what you're talking about, and I know what you're talking about.
I don't know what I'm going to say to you.
You know what I'm talking about.
It's all about us.
There is no such thing as a free lunch, and there is no such thing as a free lunch, and there is no such thing as a free lunch.
There is no such person as I don't want to give to the wife of the man who knows how to call you.
You're going to get a lot of hair.
Repeat and as soon as possible.
Because I don't want to take a series of haircuts, I don't want to take a series of haircuts.
I've got a haircut for you.
There is no way to turn a new grill.
It's not like I don't know the color.
There is no problem.
I'm going to try to get to the bottom of this one.
Yo pa gen order yon yon yon yon yon kon to call me again
It's good to know that I'm back.
You're the only one who can relate to me.
It's not like you don't know what you're talking about.
We know that the baby is still a real person, don't we?
So what's up with that reyle?
And that's only yo reyle.
If I hear you, who will I call?
A guy with the same color would make a fwen for egisam
I won't let you down.
We don't need two or more people to pass on the advice of men.
white men or white men men men
Blind men pass by on the other side.
Or if it's where the person comes from.
I'm a man of the people.
I'm a white wine man who wants to be a good man.
It's the only thing I've ever tasted.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do next.
It's a long way from the other side.
or p ap di
or m ap di
Look at the timon and see who you are.
Looking forward to seeing a package of brand-new products.
Take a pack of these marks and show them to your servant.
I've been responding to it in this way ever since.
I'm going to tell you a little bit.
Or don't tell me what to order.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
The concert will be hosted by a group of musicians.
Or I'd like to see a concert like this in its entirety.
Or maybe it's just a matter of time.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
Or they'd know someone from a long way off.
In the meantime, there is a long way to go.
It is possible for a person to be more directed than he or she can be.
I'm going to go back to the drawing board again.
I'd like to know who this person is if I took something like this as an example.
They know how to use it in such a way.
to someone who knows what's going on.
I don't think I've ever seen a face like this before.
The person may be able to figure out how to graj
Or you could say graj fig
The men are doing what they can.
I don't know if I'm going to put on a saucepan or a disease in my backyard.
I'm going to do what I want to do.
Whoever is sick will be relieved.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to figure it out.
I'm glad you're here.
If you know a person's face, it's gracious.
I'm glad you're here with me.
Nonnon figure graje
You've got your way with me.
O te sodya maladya
Riyan don't repeat that very well.
Ap fig graj or la
This is not a grain of grain.
It's not like it's a big deal.
There's no such thing as a grey face.
I don't know if it's rabou.
It's not easy being green.
I don't know how to do that.
It's the same with men.
One or two are missing.
Se pa yon blan is non.
Two, in a pot or a series of matches and a colorful coffee color, the color of chocolate is not all it's cracked up to be.
What's the matter with you, man?
Who's the one with the pole pentle?
Who doesn't have a pentle?
Do you have the right to vote, or do you have the right to vote, or do you have the right to vote?
So, who copied, copied, or did any of the people who copied?
You are the beast that inflates men.
The whole world is full of gold.
I don't know how or why I don't know who you are.
Animals can, or should, or should not, have a code.
Or if you don't know who you are, or if you don't know who you are?
I don't know who they are.
I can't tell you what to do or what not to do.
Se sa men only m
Don't you know someone who's good or bad?
Because no one else is going to be able to do it.
I know they are.
This is the pentad.
Yo konzi kommounen sann b ap commented on this
Believe that in the meantime I'm going to leave you with a little knowledge of who you are and what you're going to do.
I don't know if it's true or not.
I'm going to tell you.
I don't know where I'm going.
The gronseri de moun
I'm going to make you say it or do it.
So only you can call a.
When I get up, or when I get up, I'm going to say something.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
So what, what are you talking about, for example, and why are you blessing me?
Two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two, two,
My father and I are very proud of him.
I don't know if it's white.
It's been a while since we've seen Vyon.
My teeth are short.
That's the way it is!
Men are not so good at it.
I'm not going to lie to you.
I'm not going to show up at all.
They won't even know you're new.
They appear to be all over the place.
Don't worry about it.
Men are not allowed to wear bra.
I don't want to be alone.
The new app will appear.
Don't worry about it.
Or even to the point of being unable to do so.
I've been blessed with the ability to show up.
I'm here to help you.
They're going to eat a lot of food.
It's my way of looking at it.
And then there's the fact that they're checking.
If the men are not at the top of their game,
I'm not sure what to do about it.
It's either falling or falling.
I'm going to tell you a story.
I don't know any place men.
If we can't get enough of it, we're going to have to do something about it.
It's a ton of benzoic acid.
Or, as you know, everyone is going to have a good time and a good time with you.
If you have something to say about people and things, then you have to say it.
I've been a lonely person ever since.
That's how only one person can know.
Can you order it?
Can anyone tell me that I've been alone for a long time?
I've been so lonely, so good, so good, so good again.
You've known a lot of people since then.
I mean, who's been there since Lot?
After that, I didn't eat again.
I'm not going to talk about it.
No one knows what I'm talking about.
I'm going to talk to you.
We're not going to talk.
But for two hours, I tried to hold on to you.
It's the only thing I've ever heard of.
It's not like I don't know what I'm talking about.
Now that I'm a man, I believe in the order that I know you, that I'm going to be a man.
Or ahead of you, I don't know how to get ahead of you?
Dejanme te, dejanme te jwis.
For example, in the form, soap.
So one person tap on one person's tap on the other, and there's no credit card.
Who am I, or who am I, or who is Paul, to hurt me?
And there's nothing underneath that I know about.
It's not that easy.
If you remember them, you'll remember them.
We are going to repay the loan.
Who can do anything to hurt me?
Okay, there you go, yeah, isn't there?
So I'm going to re-release it.
So I'm going to re-release it.
It's just a matter of time before it's too late.
Yo anle plim yo anle plim
Plimen pa brav si se yon onm man
For example, if he or she is a member of the MAP, he or she is a member of the MAP.
The plimen pa brav
It's not like it's going to be easy.
We can't help it.
And it came to pass in the days of Gad that he saw you.
I'm going to tell you a story.
I could write a poem that won't go unnoticed.
I'm going to write my poetry, if you will.
Well, yes, yes, why, what are you doing?
Dad, I just wanted to let you know.
Or don't you know how, how?
It's not even the same.
It's not the same bagal.
If you don't ask me, I'm going to ask you.
There's no way out of it.
They're nowhere to be found.
I've been banned from releasing new ones.
The good and the bad are not good.
I'm going to write a poem about what I'm going to do.
You can't live without me.
I'm going to do my best.
There is no such thing as a no-consequence.
I'm ready to go now.
or priye nou
I'm the only one who's ready.
Gen a releases a ton of noise
Donnen Jwet and Voye too.
For the sake of clarity and clarity.
I don't know if it's a good idea.
It's not like we're going to have a party.
If you don't take medication or any other medication, you're going to have a problem with it.
For example, if you are looking for an example of a k ap formen
I'm going to try to make it easy for you.
There is no excuse for not being able to do this in a formal way.
I'm not going to be able to do anything about it.
If you don't want to go to a pharmacy or a pharmacy, go to a pharmacy or a pharmacy.
I'm going to give you a piece of advice.
It's your right to educate yourself.
I don't know if everything is right for me.
It's not right even if it's not right, but it's the right thing to do, and it's the right thing to do.
Or a good song in such a way that you can hear it.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to withdraw the bond.
I'm able to retire my soul as soon as I'm ready to retire.
I know a few songs about you.
I've just heard you sing.
I don't know how to sing.
Or you don't need a machete.
It's the same person.
Or, on the contrary, your teeth are clean.
If you want to entertain me, I want to entertain you.
Anmen but not now
It's the same thing as Jenn.
They're not going to be able to keep up with what's going on.
It's not a birthday party to have sex with someone.
Eat or consume well.
I started off well, I had a nice voice too men if I'm singing a, lepou, mwen tè, m'ap chante, chante nou.
En men, or w ap rechante anpò?
My grandfather was a fisherman, didn't he know my mother?
Okay, so now I'm on medication or something?
I've never been to Christmas.
A ben non zi
I don't know if it's a console or a relay.
They're not here anymore.
He or she can withdraw a message placed in front of the console or return it to the console.
It's never too late.
The men were able to bow down.
I've never had the right to do anything wrong.
What is this thing, for example, that you call me?
Sa, jenou, or good or bad?
I'm going to give you a bad or bad order.
An order can't be re-ordered.
I don't know if I'll ever know the new generation.
Everything about the new generation is going to be bad.
There's something wrong with that.
So, in the meantime, who's going to call me?
They're still alive.
Well, if you don't mind, if you don't mind, where do you go from here?
What do you do with your phone?
If it's not a bad idea, what is a bad idea?
Oh, my gosh.
Don't go through the wrong thing or the wrong thing.
This is the only way to relieve li.
The jacket is made of leather.
Either you smile at the back of your head, or you smile at the back of your head.
Men are not allowed to speak their minds.
I'll be right behind the members of the committee.
Or take re-release of lòdichan again
It's too early to tell.
Ou lòdichan again
Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
It is not yet formally available.
It's not Jojan I'm not formally, so how do you say, wii Zojan I'm, I'm where?
I'm going to Zojan and I'm going to make a mistake.
That's how they're doing it.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I'm not going to talk.
I'm not going to talk to Jojan.
I don't even know what else to do anymore.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to talk to you again.
I don't want to lose my legs.
I don't know.
I don't know how to look good.
I'm not sure I'll ever be able to do it.
A clock is made in the Lord's hand.
It's all over the place.
And then there's the fact that it's a little bit too much.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
What is the meaning of the word all wi Koun?
So, what's the problem?
I'm going to go to the bathroom.
The men of Powi and Yoon Ap Di
The order can be re-ordered.
If you're underweight or obese, you'll be able to do it.
Wap konn releases the jen order again
I'm going to make a mistake.
Or don't win the relay, but as long as you're at the bottom of the bay, I'm happy to be with you.
Or do you know where to start?
I mean, what do you mean, I don't know what's going on?
Or do you know?
Shouldn't I know or remember?
No, yo an jou, mwen.
Kons, what's the matter with you?
It's cool, who's that?
Is it too late?
E-pa, do you know?
Sezo, or do you know what you're talking about?
Or at least listen to his grandfather, or at least the band.
Are you ready for this, or do you know where you are?
Okay, OK, now, how do you call it?
The stomach is good, but if it's not in the stomach, how do you feel about it?
What's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up?
It's the only way to get rid of it.
I know I'm going to have to go back and forth and I'm going back and forth and I'm going back and forth and I'm going back and forth and I'm going back and forth and I'm going back and forth and I'm going back and forth and I'm going back and forth and I'm going back and forth and I'm going back and forth and I'm going back and forth and I'm going back and forth and I'm going back and forth and I'm going back and forth and I'm going back and forth and
I'm also very happy with the way it turned out.
There's only one person who can relate to me.
I'm going to tell you a few things that I'm not sure about.
It's like the one under the tivan.
Not all men are the same, but all men are the same.
wi dway y di senti atouy
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it properly, but if I'm going to be able to do it properly, I'm not going to be able to do it properly.
I'm just trying to get to the bottom of it.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything about it.
And then there's what I want to say.
Or don't always order them.
I don't know what to say.
You've got a penny and you've got a penny and you've got a penny and you've got a penny and you've got a penny and you've got a penny and you've got a penny and you've got a penny and you've got a penny and you've got a penny and you've got a penny and you've got a penny and you've got a penny and you've got a penny and you've got a penny.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to make it to my grandmother's house.
In the meantime, good sir, I know you.
I'm not going to make a mistake.
It doesn't have to be that way.
Do you know what you're doing in that room?
What do you think about it?
What kind of room do I have?
What if that's the case?
Who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men, who are the men?
The people in your chair.
So, if you understand what I'm saying here in Bethesda, you're right, and at the end of the day, it's so loud.
Did they lift your chair?
Raise your chair, but I know you can't stand it, okay, if you can't stand it.
Gade, look who I am and who I am, do I believe who I am, or who I am, or who I am?
This is Boubouy.
But the private life is not yet known.
Let's make people like men.
It's as close as if you've lost something important to you.
I don't know what I'm going to tell my kids.
It's time to move on.
Mwa, if you know what I mean.
Gon kote, hm, Gon kote l la w, you're finally the one I'm talking about right now.
Do you know what they're saying?
With the finman.
Now we are always looking for a few things to do with you.
He's behind the men he's throwing away.
What's the big deal again?
What do you want me to do?
There is no one else, there is no one in the room, there is no one in the room.
If I didn't do that, I'd be playing concerts.
If you think I'm going to do this, I'm going to do this.
I thought I was going to be able to get the Enbèk and I knew I was going to be able to get the Revondi.
There are also Bondal M's who know what they're doing.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
And I'm going to tell you the truth.
The genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the gen
A compact orange phone is mounted on the rear of the vehicle.
Tell me what to do about it.
I'm going to try to make it up to you.
The ap di chenidom
And then there's the fact that I don't know what to do with myself.
It's a great way to get to know men.
I'll tell you what to do when someone makes a big mistake.
Who am I supposed to be?
I'm going to tell you, who's going to tell you, who's going to tell you, who's going to tell you, who's going to tell you, who's going to tell you, who's going to tell you, who's going to tell you, who's going to tell you, who's going to tell you, who's going to tell you, who's going to tell you, who's going to tell you, who's going to tell you, who's going to tell you, who's going to tell
I'm with my brother.
It's not like they're not going to be able to do it.
I'm going to do the lobbying.
I'm not the only one who knows what I'm talking about.
I can't wait to release it.
The good and the bad is that you don't know what you're doing.
Or they'll know better if someone is going to be able to relate.
I'm good at hearing if I'm good at hearing if I'm good at hearing if I'm good at hearing if I'm good at hearing if I'm good at hearing if I'm good at hearing if I'm good at hearing if I'm good at hearing if I'm good at hearing if I'm good at hearing if I'm good at hearing if I'm good at hearing if I'm good at hearing if I'm good at hearing if I'm good at hearing if I'm good at hearing if I'm good at hearing if
On the one hand, I'm listening to what you're saying.
I'm on my way.
It's my way of putting it together.
I don't know what to say about Bosaleel.
Repeat this again.
I don't know if it's true or not.
Let's get to know each other better.
The son of a laundryman said to me that he was going to do it.
I'm looking forward to it.
There's no other way I know what I'm doing.
It's not the same person who repeats the same thing.
It's not like I'm a person.
There are people who feel sorry for themselves and their families.
The thing about the ample Eee epi
Take care of yourself.
Don't you want to be a part of it?
What is the meaning of life, and what is the meaning of life, and what is the meaning of life, and what is the meaning of life, and what is the meaning of life, and what is the meaning of life, and what is the meaning of life, and what is the meaning of life, and what is the meaning of life, and what is the meaning of life, and what is the meaning of life, and what is the meaning of life, and what is the meaning of life, and what is the meaning of life?
If you're a man, you're a man.
You're the only one who feels sorry for you.
It's the only thing that gets in the way.
I've been waiting for you to call me back.
I can't help but wonder.
What is the meaning of God?
It's not about the children and the children.
It's the same with all of them.
It's the only thing I've ever known.
I've got a lot of good stuff going on.
Do you know why?
It's good for both men and adults.
How do you know what to do with it?
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
Or not to be confused with to know the king.
I know you are.
You don't know what you're talking about.
I know I'm here.
This is the only way that people can relate to each other.
Running a lap, for example, is not a bad thing.
I'm going back to the clock.
Things children know about choute yo yo yo pa know boul gen
Dad, why do you want to call me back?
If you have a phone number, if you have a phone number, do you want to order it again?
Once again, once again, bravan order, good, good.
Or, if it's about that, you're going to have to do other things you don't know about, right?
Who are you, and who are you born to be?
Akis pregis again, vijimte l.
And for the big guys, a maché, I'm going to play now.
For the first time, I know that there are people who are really good at things, really good at things, but they are good at things.
I'm the one who's got it all figured out.
It is also suitable for adults.
For adults, too, it's about who you are.
Yo bi a bay adult many people a seven
There's nothing wrong with that.
Men as if they were big men.
I'm going to try to find the right person.
I'm one of those people who's got a lot of things going on.
Men or women.
What is the name of the genome?
It's the kind of thing you can do with your card.
You can't go to Rome to find out what's going on.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
There is no other way to do this.
I don't know how to chat.
I don't know what I can say.
Se men chatou, se men chatou.
Well, here's the thing, I'm a guy who's compact about the new stuff, and I'm a guy who's got a lot to say.
That's the only way I know how to play.
It's my condition, it's my condition.
I won't be here again.
It's the only thing I can do.
On his ride defi
I'm going to try to find a monchan and I'm going to try to find a new one.
Well, I can't even find the kids to make it up to you.
The family of the child is well-connected to the family.
I'm a woman who's been around for a long time.
And, as I write, I ask myself a question or answer, so that I can answer it.
Well, it's not a family, it's a family, it's a family, it's a family, it's a family, it's a family, it's a family, it's a family, it's a family, it's a family, it's a family, it's a family, it's a family, it's a family, it's a family, it's a family, it's a family, it's a family, it's a family, it's a family, it's
It's a good place to start.
If they are arrested, they will be arrested.
There's another new man again.
I don't know what else to do.
I'm not going to lie to you.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
It's not even a letter.
Letters from the letter li
I know what they say or what they say.
There is no such thing as an Egyptian and there is no such thing as an Egyptian.
Something is more important than anything else when a person's life is the same as it is when he or she has to repeat it.
On top of the bay, bon koni wi, or konè byen pop, or pa k ap mandin nou.
When a good man is a good man, he will never be forgotten.
There is no exception to this rule.
I'm going to say goodbye.
I'm sure I'll be able to get the same results.
No, I can't tell you what to do.
Bon nefri la ou mwen li pa gen nou nou again yeah
For example, if there's something you want to know, or if you want to tell me something you don't know.
Or do you know what you're talking about?
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it myself or not.
On the one hand, it's a good idea.
It's not just about men, it's about men, it's about men.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
For example, la w ap pale si
How many people can do such a thing?
They're on the verge of collapse.
They know it.
It's a great way to learn.
They are on the side of the empire.
There's more to it than meets the eye.
The people who know how to take care of you and the people who need to know how to take care of you and the people who steal from you.
That's how I steal it.
When I take it they steal it.
This is the way people use it.
The men and women who are responsible for doing so are also involved.
I'm not going to say anything about it.
I'm going to do a little bit of coaching.
The anxiety of the people is that they can do it.
tanzan tanz to make the most of it.
I'm going to use it.
I'm looking forward to it.
My ex-girlfriend's husbands and wives are not my wives.
I'm going to do this kind of thing.
That's how I'm going to be able to do it.
When I steal from you, I steal from you, I steal from you, I steal from you, I steal from you, I steal from you, I steal from you, I steal from you, I steal from you, I steal from you, I steal from you, I steal from you, I steal from you, I steal from you, I steal from you, I steal from you, I steal from you, I steal from you, I steal from you, I steal from you, I steal from you
On the matter of the sun is a brother to the light.
I'm sure you'll be able to see it.
There is no one to ride you on things that you put in such a reche yo
It's the kind of person you want to be.
Concerts were held with people from all walks of life.
You know who's going to kill you.
I don't have any money.
I've been working with high school and college students since I was a kid.
One of them is tooth decay.
The ears of a person with hearing loss are the ears of a person with hearing loss.
It's not like I'm going to make it or break it.
Or they can say I'm sorry.
I can't wait to get started.
That's why I'm here.
That's why I'm here to listen to you.
That's what I'm doing right now.
That's what I'm doing right now.
That's what I'm going to do.
That's what I'm doing.
I have friends with whom I can talk.
On the guy at the exant.
If you have a problem, or if you don't have a problem, or if you don't have a problem, or if you don't have a problem, or if you don't have a problem, or if you don't have a problem, or if you don't have a problem, or if you don't have a problem, or if you don't have a problem, or if you don't have a problem, or if you don't have a problem, or if you don't have a problem, or if you don't have a problem,
Once you've got the money, you're going to have to pay for it.
Where am I supposed to go?
Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
Well, there's no way I'm going to be in front of the area, so I know where it is.
I know you can, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you
I love them so much.
Li rebe bay blag
It's good to know.
It's not about those who love you.
A person, for example, who is married to a man or a woman who is not married to a man or a woman who is not married to a woman or a man who is not married to a woman who is not married to a man or a woman who is not married to a man or a woman who is not married to a woman who is not married to a man or a woman who is not married to a man or a woman who is not married to a woman who is not married to a man or a woman who is not married to a woman.
If it's civilian, I'll take the luggage.
Men's women's teams are competing.
I'm going to try to make it work.
I'm going to be in a hurry.
I'm not going to do anything about it.
Or good use of it at first.
I don't know who I am or what I'm talking about.
Anyone who is interested in listening to the music or listening to the music can listen to it.
I don't want to lose my teeth when I'm like this.
Pa ekstab konn bay diskou
The guy knows how to play the disco.
Or I'll tell you what.
Is it good to have a good man on your feet?
That's what I'm doing.
I know what I'm doing.
Even people, for example, don't know what to do about it.
That's why I know I'm going to have a lot of fun.
I also know what I'm talking about.
What can you do to a man or a woman?
I don't know what to expect, Lan.
Do you know anything about Bege's phone?
My great-grandmother told me and told me that she gave birth to my son, Bege.
No, I don't, I know the system.
I'm a pity prom wal te te in my ansen lord young joye an an good invention sa w know din now?
And, well, when you open your mouth again, do you know how to do it?
Se, Sejou Damin do, because it is good for me to know everything.
I don't know what to do with myself, but I have a choice.
There are many people who are hoping to have a baby.
If, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then, then,
An, an, because I think there is.
I'm fine with it, I'm fine with it, I'm fine with it, I'm fine with it, I'm fine with it, I'm fine with it, I'm fine with it, I'm fine with it, I'm fine with it, I'm fine with it, I'm fine with it, I'm fine with it, I'm fine with it, I'm fine with it, I'm fine with it, I'm fine with it, I'm fine with it, I'm fine with it,
Let's do the right thing here.
That's what it's all about.
Tell me what you want to know.
I know who you are and what you're going to do.
I'm going to be a footballer.
The same area is the same.
It's all in my head.
It's not like they're having kids.
The baby's head is on a baby's cherry.
When an adult tells a story.
They say the words.
They tell me the words.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to talk to an adult.
It's the first time I've seen it.
pi as a record l
I asked Chak Granmoun another word and he replied.
Since my grandmother is a doctor, I'm going to do a lap.
Or something to be said again after re-arranging a lap La
Who's the bad guy?
The vestiges of an adult are the only ones I know of.
This is a replica of a panacea.
I'm not complaining about it and I'm not complaining about it.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything else in my life.
I'm going to stand by and want to walk on each other's shoulders.
You are one of the men.
I want to fight Men seponnon sa y ap faire se pa wou
Se jouye only yo de wi y ap di betiz tou
And the men of Bethesda are very proud of their achievements.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
There is no longer an order.
I don't know how to code a thing or a gen.
vantou yo rele Mwen an yo rele ti code sa yo
What are you doing now?
The good news is that they are not the only ones who have the right to vote.
It will also be the same as the one I know on the map.
The people who used to look at the map M ap la vo vo kouwè ele
They're all right.
In the meantime, I'm going to take a look.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
I'm going to try and make it up to you.
When you're done with it again, you're going to be fine, okay, you're going to be fine.
There's a lot of people's graffiti, including creole.
I'm going to tell you a story.
Or that he'd be able to talk to someone else about it.
I'm not going to say that you don't understand them because you don't know how to understand them.
Wap te French l'appale
It's creole and it's pale.
If you're using creole, you'll be able to use it.
I know that it doesn't matter who you are or who you are or what you're going to get.
All the men in the room have heard that I'm not the only one in the room.
I'm not sure what to do with my teeth.
I'm going to take it from a very long time ago.
Whether or not this is a passion, I don't know how I'm going to do it.
It's a good one.
It's not a passion.
There's no such thing.
For those of us who live in the same area, we have to change our minds about convalescence.
Can you tell me what to do?
In the meantime, you'll also be able to call militant militants, men and other people in the area, and so on.
If I'm a militon and a man, I'm good at other things.
And other great people say so.
It's not even close.
It's time for you to wake up.
The people of the Caribbean.
It's been a while since we've had a wake-up call.
I'm going to tell you all about it.
I'm all for it and I'm all for it.
I'm going to ask you.
It's all my fault.
Men are from the Caribbean.
The people of the relay are banned from entering the country.
I've been banned for a long time.
If someone talks to you on a daily basis and you can understand what they're saying, they'll talk to you on a daily basis.
pale lap lap creole
It is a creole language.
You'll be treated like a silk bear.
I'm not going anywhere.
as silhouette of the day.
It's not a bad idea.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
It's just a matter of time before we're done.
It's not like I'm going to talk to anyone.
It's a fashionable way to talk to my friends.
As long as I'm not afraid to hear the words I'm going to tell you, I'm not going to tell you anything.
Not li pa fou
People like you who live in the country and live in the countryside are not allowed to speak their own language.
Or I'll say I'm the one who fired.
Men will kill people and they will go to hell.
I'm not a woman anymore.
I don't know if I'm going to make it through.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it.
It's all about the people.
Promise me that you'll be there for me.
There's a lot more to it than that.
There's a lot of stress when it comes to people's lives.
A donkey or a promoted person.
It's not just about people or things, it's about people.
We don't know if we're going to be able to get people to take care of us.
Take a woman to the village.
I've never heard of a bay like this before.
Take a woman in such a situation.
Take it easy on yourself.
You don't know what I'm talking about.
I'm going to tell you about it.
There is no problem.
Because I'm not going to be able to do it.
Because chak sa or re se se mwen di or li
Put me in a movie so I can know if I'm going to make it or if I'm going to ask you if I'm going to make it.
It's like a cherry on the side of a man or a woman.
It's better for a guy or a girl than someone who's willing to listen to me.
What am I going to tell you?
It's like they're talking about a man.
Pale with a mountain
Gen dwa di nou order jan tou or gen dwa di nou order jan tou or gen dwa di nou order jan tou or gen dwa di nou order jan tou or gen dwa di nou order jan tou or gen dwa di nou order jan tou or gen dwa di nou order jan tou or gen dwa di nou order jan tou or gen dwa di nou order jan tou or gen dwa di nou order jan tou or gen dwa di nou order
Take the guy off the table.
Or is it the inter-rison, the inter-rison?
Okay, so what do I know?
It's hot and humid.
They are talking about one day at a time.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it.
I can't wait to meet the men.
I don't have a problem with people.
I'm going to tell you, you know.
I'm going to tell you.
I don't know what's going on, but it's going to happen.
All the people of Kroz yo so only one person is a cardinal
It's all about the people.
Reimbursement or redemption of a person's debts.
I'm going to have to pack some of the stuff in my pocket.
Everybody's going to bite you.
Where are you going again?
I'm not going to say a word.
It's a short story.
This is why we're here today, and we're here today, and we're here today, and we're here today, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here.
For example, when someone wants something new or something new.
I haven't seen you in two or more years.
I can't help but wonder.
They'll tell me what to do.
There's something about your account.
I'm going to be fine.
I've seen things happen on your account.
Someone has come to visit them.
Or I'll say no now as a matter of fact.
I'm not going to take anything for granted.
What do you think I'm going to do about it?
I'm going to take a look at this for you.
When these people come to me, they will say the words I want to say or they will say the words I want to say.
Who's going to ask me for this package?
I've heard of this package, but who's responsible for it?
or ap responsible, men wap di m pap pran e.
Are you ready for this?
I'm going to take this man and I'm going to take this man and I'm going to take this man and I'm going to take this man and I'm going to take this man and I'm going to take this man and I'm going to take this man and I'm going to take this man and I'm going to take this man and I'm going to take this man and I'm going to take this man and I'm going to take this man and I'm going to take this man and I'm going to take this man and
I'm not going to take it anymore.
It's not so much that I'm taking it.
A new thing or a soup, for example.
It's not your fault.
You're the one who's got it all figured out.
Donkswa w ap di person nan m pap pran
Or you could say I'm going to take some time off to talk to you guys.
and jouman wou men
How am I supposed to take the day off?
I've heard a lot about this.
You two are the ones who made me feel like I was in a bowl.
Li gate bay la
They didn't pay for anything.
All the men were happy.
Do you love someone who still loves you?
I love the bay disco.
I love the bay diskou and the li
They love another bay.
It's not an order yet, it's a order again.
They like bay blogs.
I'm not sure about anything else.
They like bay touriya
Do you like bay phrases?
Children are encouraged to participate in the concert.
It's not like we're going to be able to keep up with what's going on.
The thing about you is that you're going to have to re-read it.
I'm going to take advantage of that.
You're talking about a child who's on the run behind you.
I don't want to eat anything that's not my fault.
Gen maga is the name of the game.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not, but I want to know what it is.
Concerts of people can be heard, for example.
They hear or understand something.
They're willing to listen to other people's stories.
It's like a tripotay!
It's tripotay again!
It's the end of the world.
I'm not going to lie to you.
What color is it?
Wimen, yeah, langmi is sleeping outside.
Where are you going, sleeping outside?
Wimen, if you're in my shoes, are you in my shoes?
I'm going to tell you this.
We've got a lot of people coming to us.
These are the people.
It's all about you.
I don't think I'm going to be able to make it to the other side of the ocean.
I'm going to tell you the truth.
I'm going to take a look at it.
Or two?
If I put it with a, then I'm going to put it with pi, for a long time to come.
If you don't know who they are,
I don't know how long it will take me.
Men know how to do things for a long time or a year.
or ya long or an
For example, you might say that I'm not a good person.
Either that, or it's the same word for word in the first place.
This is the first time we've done this.
Or to give you a bri machè
It's like they're talking about you.
Or they'll just go through with it.
The men are still in Judah.
I've heard of the trio.
I've always wanted to do something.
Or know of Judah.
After you've done it, you'll be able to do it again.
I'm going to try to make a trio, always a bunch of people!
I'm going to tell you about the trio.
I'm going to try to make a tripod out of it.
I know you're on the number one spot.
The guys are still at work.
There are a lot of people out there who have a lot of energy.
I don't know who the guy is.
It's not like we're the only ones in Bondi.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
They're big enough to know a lot of people.
Men who like to work when I'm at work are not allowed to work.
They can work.
They're not working.
You know who you are or who you are.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to see this person or not.
Someone ordered jouvi nou vwen nou two figil or ti jan bien bagage or di epi
You can do it or you can do it.
I'm not a big fan of it.
Whether the wine is sick or not, the wine is cooked on top of what is left of the wine.
I'm sure you'll find that there's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
I'll give them a little bit of wine.
I'm sure you'll be able to enjoy the wine.
There are many types of li
It's not the end of the world.
I want to be able to create something like this.
It's not just one of them.
There is no one to talk to before.
On whom te vin malad wè
Or the right generation to be great right now.
They've been drinking wine for a long time.
They've been drinking wine for a long time.
There's no such thing as a perfect wine.
Oh well, that's it.
I'm going to make sure I'm sick.
Yo di Figil on the ti chan ki a.
Figil, who deso se.
Ah, that's right.
Or I'll take a bite.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to handle this or not.
Don't be fooled by this one.
I'm looking forward to seeing you again.
A good example of this is someone who is doing the right thing.
Li kouche I can't work at all.
How do I win?
Is it in Paris?
It's not like my mom won't be able to keep up with me.
The men made the new wine in the garden.
I can't work here because I can.
It is necessary to consume a person in a kilopital in order to prevent them from becoming infected.
You can send it by example or by clicking on it.
Even the hotel is full of wine.
What is the meaning of a person's life?
Where is the way?
ouuke souke li
I'm not sure if it's worth it.
People with disabilities.
They do everything in their power.
I'm not going to sleep.
One or two up your sleeve.
I don't want to do it all over again.
Or, as you know, sogen en.
OR, is there only one person at sea or at sea, or is there only one person at sea?
Okay, so who's next?
I gen, tranble gen, tranble what?
He has a weakness.
Men's lap lap is the lap of a man's lap.
There is also a weakness.
Listen carefully and if someone like you can hear me, I'll be there.
I stood as if I wanted to.
Men are eager to fall.
Do you think I'm ready as if I'm going to fall, or do you think I'm ready?
I'm falling for the men.
There is no one who can help you.
I'm sure you'll be able to do that.
It's a great way to get people to listen to your guitar.
It's not just me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it to the next level.
Gen de las lágrimas is a video game that is self-contained by Gen san wo.
There are some people who don't know what they're talking about.
They're not going to make it.
There are men.
He is the only one who can walk alone.
And they made me call them around.
If you don't know how much water is there, how do you do it?
There is a decomposition.
Why aren't they?
There is a decomposition of men in such a way that men, men, and men are not decomposed.
They are not decomposed, but they can be disassembled.
It's not about the health of the mind.
You don't know what you're talking about.
or voyeur antelope.
They are made up of Menentel compounds.
Men are not sick.
These are ill-fated men.
I'm not going to lie to you guys.
We are not available to other people.
Or a sauce, or a broth, or a broth, or a broth, to be thrown away.
The people who know you are on your lap.
For example, a person who is possessed by a demon and is in a position to win a prize.
It's about what's good for you.
How do you know if I'm going to win?
What's going on in the world?
What's the next step?
What is the genesis of digestion?
How can I win again?
Or will be for the wak li wap
I'm going to take a look at it.
I'm going to take a look at them.
It's the same person.
They don't do it any more.
They're not going to do anything wrong.
Is there a color?
If someone is sick and tired of it, they will die.
I'll tell you what I'm going to do and what I'm going to do.
How can I do this?
Poulka, can I pick it up?
Yes, in order to collect, but in order not to get sick, I don't have them, I sacrifice them.
Where is your order?
Gen on who is doing it.
There are two networks that can be accessed.
I'm going to take a pill.
Souke is in his room.
What can you do again?
There is no such thing as a free lunch or even a free lunch.
They don't know who they are.
They've got a lot to say.
We're going to have a lot of fun.
It's too late for that.
There is no knowledge.
They don't have knowledge, they don't have it.
People who don't have knowledge, don't have knowledge.
Don't be fooled.
They lost their knowledge.
Or who knows?
Do you know anyone, anyone or anything?
If someone, for example, is in bed, in the hospital, and all the time in the hospital, how will you feel about me?
Is there a buzzword for me?
Don't give up on them, because if they have something, they're going to lose it.
I've had the pleasure of working with you.
I don't know when I'm going to work or when I'm not going to work or when I'm not going to be able to work.
Or do you know if someone has the flu?
I'm going to use a whole bunch of words.
I'll tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm going to kill a very sick person, even if I'm sick, I'm going to die.
I'm going to die, and I'm going to die, and I'm going to die.
That's why I'm telling you what I'm doing.
Those who are evil will die.
The men were in a frenzy.
the lap rann flèm lap rann flèm
I know what I'm talking about.
Don't forget to do your job again.
I'm not sure what happened.
You don't know if you know me.
I'm not sure if it's worth it.
I'm sure you'll be able to use it.
I'm going to die.
It's okay to release together for the sake of humanity.
Even if they do not live forever, they will not die.
It's okay if the person is doing it.
The people who live in the neighborhood have a lot to do with it.
I'm going to tell you about rapping.
And when it comes down to it, it's going to make you feel better.
It's the only thing I can tell you.
I knew they were going to die.
I know a lot of things I'm going to say again.
I'm not sure if I'm going to get rid of them.
I know they're there.
Is there anyone who is now obsessed with the Latrin souls of his fans?
Fig debanab we men se fig lari when the gen of things is now li li li on ti jan anti jan
Two generations of men or now they are going to drink wine again and again they are going to drink wine again and again.
There is no such thing as a man's soul.
I'm going to tell you about your van, and I'm not going to tell you about it.
It's not like there's an order of things or something to be done.
Men like you can lead people to new generations.
For example, if you want to go back to the latrine, go back to the latrine.
I'm here now.
They're in the latrine.
Three times a day.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about this guy.
They're making a lot of wine.
I know the concerts now and I'm going to be with the people who are going to be with me now.
Or what?
They're doing it for you.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything for you guys.
On one vande disease one se one person knows win
For example, they know how to do everything they want to do.
Or get all the stomachs or a flé
Sometimes there's even a three-way tie for first place.
I'm not sure if it's a direct kilowatt.
I don't know about you.
Men like that are so excited.
I don't know the order yet.
I don't know the order.
People who don't know how to run a series are watching.
It's been a long time since I've been able to live in a place like this.
There's no other way I'm going to call you again.
There is no other way to do this.
The men or women of one bay la
It's not just you.
or live a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a
Or live with me.
I'm also good.
One of the main causes of illness.
on se ride moun konn gen
I'm going to try to make it work.
Di Adi Konrèd or Madi Konrèd
They don't even know you.
I don't know what they are.
I know that people who are sick or dying of a disease can get sick all the time.
You're going to have to deal with your illness.
It's not a disease.
I'm not sure what's going on.
Because it's not a disease if the person is struck by it, I don't remember anything about it or I don't know what it is.
Some men know that they have been sick for a long time, but they also know that they have been sick for a long time.
Or do you know
I know things are wrong.
It's hard to know what to do.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
I don't know what to say anymore.
What do you know about it?
I, too, remained with you for a few days until I became an ambassador, re.
The whole world is full of people.
I'm not going to lie in the cold.
I can't take lawouze with bay sa a
and ann rele
Okay, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, good.
I don't know who this person is.
I've been thinking about it for a while now.
Rematis yo and onn dizan
It's not like you don't know what you're talking about.
Man is a genus of man himself.
They know that there is a disease.
I've been drinking so much wine.
I've always been this way.
I'm a man of the people.
The party has no right to take such a decision.
I've been drinking wine for a while.
I'm not going to tell my council.
Who's the man?
The genesis of the guys is to reunite.
A generation of people are coming together.
The genus of people who live together, for example, is known as the clawed pike or clawed pike.
Or at least a little bit of coffee.
or a disease.
It's either a general or a red picket.
It's not like I'm going to sleep with you, it's like I'm going to sleep with you, it's like I'm going to sleep with you, it's like I'm going to sleep with you, it's like I'm going to sleep with you, it's like I'm going to sleep with you, it's like I'm going to sleep with you, it's like I'm going to sleep with you, it's like I'm going to sleep with you, it's like I'm going
The disease is caused by a genetic disorder.
I'm going to do something about it.
It's all about me.
It's not like you're going to die.
I'm going to try to get a win.
I don't know what I'm going to say.
I'm going to do it.
It's a disease that someone knows about.
They know how to deal with people's problems.
The illness caused him to fall ill.
the blood pressure, if the blood pressure.
If anyone can afford to make a brother and sister on the new card.
When I was a kid, I knew I was going to have to go to the bathroom.
You don't have to go to the bathroom.
They are sick even if they are sick.
They're your dad too.
You have the right to have a child with you.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it.
I'm going to take a look at the two men.
Or if I'm going to do it again.
I can't wait to be outside.
Or do some men
Everything that I've been through has become a mystery to me.
It's a great way to connect with people in your community.
Tensions are high, and the only way to relieve them is to relieve the other one.
For example, if you know something, you'll be fine.
I fell from my bed.
It's hard to say if there's a person who can't afford to have children.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I can't wait to get to the next person.
It's not enough to have water in it.
I'll give you one.
If you don't know what to do, will you let me do it?
What do you know about it?
Oh shit, that's right.
Well, let's get together and pack up the grease.
I've got a short one.
Or I'll release it shortly.
Or don't order me to call you back.
Or do you know?
I don't know if I'm going to be able to read it or not.
I can't wait to see it.
I'm not going to say goodbye.
Or apologise to me because I'm not here.
I'm not going to try.
I'm sure you'll like it.
I'm going to take it from you.
I'm looking forward to seeing the packaging.
Come on, you're going to have a lot of fun.
repoze wkesye or again good to wte dib yo
Children who are sick and sick feel the same way about what is happening in their lives.
I don't want to see you again.
You've won again, you're a child.
Those who know a series of debates and live up to the hype.
But I know you're white and I know you're white.
It's not like you're a little kid.
Take, for example, the situation in which a person has won or lost his or her right to vote.
The winners of the competition, for example, are ill-equipped.
What do you think I'm doing wrong?
I'm not sure how I'm going to do it.
There are good examples of people who have such a disease.
I can't do what I can to make it right.
There is no doubt that the people of Kourèd will be able to return to their homes again.
I don't even know how to read it.
There is no such thing as a curfew.
The people of Bondago know how to sing in the choir.
It's not like I'm going to tell you a secret.
Non concertide man nou condition or stand in front of you two
In front of you is a large cell.
I can't walk if I want to go for a walk in the woods.
I'm not sure how I'm going to replace it.
Pa gen order jan yo rele san as ak loukou.
I'm not sure what to do with it.
In the room you know things about your job.
It's the only thing you can know.
I don't know anymore.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I don't even know who you are.
If something goes wrong, you can't do it.
And then they made it to the chechens for the rede touse.
Everything I have for centuries can be thrown away.
It's the only thing I've ever done.
Oppression is not good enough.
There will be others like you who don't know me.
There's no other way to do it.
It's going to be a test.
I know Simon is sick.
The men of the vineyard are here.
It's the only way they're going to be able to do it.
You'll never be able to eat them again until they're gone.
They're back together again.
There's a lot more to it than that.
They don't know what to do.
Generate a series of people, for example, who know or even know about a series of illnesses.
He knows how to deal with his illness.
You know I'm going to kill you.
I'm with you.
Don't be afraid to ask someone who knows you or who knows you is on the genesis series.
There's no other way to do it again.
Anbèy gen kont bay
I know what you're talking about.
What do you want to do with it again?
I'm going to go with a, I'm going with a, I'm going with a, I'm going with a, I'm going with a, I'm going with a, I'm going with a, I'm going with a, I'm going with a, I'm going with a, I'm going with a, I'm going with a, I'm going with a, I'm going with a, I'm going with a, I'm going with a, I'm going with a, I'm going with
Okay, well, I'm sick of taking a baby when I'm in a coma, so what's the big deal?
I'm going to tell you something, tache pouve.
Do you know who it is?
Ba chonj li.
I'm going to be a diocese.
Yes, a duke.
That's the only way to get rid of them.
I'm going to call you Paul.
They'll know it's you.
It's all about the people.
I don't know how many people I'm talking about.
There is no other gen de chan yo konn rele lan Gen chikou
The commands of the king are fulfilled.
They don't know how to order Jan anpwa or anpwa.
This is my first birthday.
I'm here to help you.
I'm going to have to make a little tea.
I'm going to buy you a drink and a drink, but I'm not going to buy you a drink.
I'm not going to say anything about it.
It's not like you don't know what you're talking about.
A beast is a beast.
And then there's the whole thing.
I'm not going to let you down.
Okay, well, I don't know if it's your birthday.
Pi an, gen da, tout ko, be yon big ball.
I'm not going to tell anyone.
I know how to live my life.
I know I'll take you.
Empi y ap tranple t ap foy pannou beast yo medicou yo gen
I'm going to release it.
If you're going to try it out, you're going to have to take a lot of stuff and take it out with a little rechochori.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
Bi, what's the matter with you?
I know, I know, I don't know, but I can take this man.
It's not like I'm going to keep a diary, it's like I'm not going to keep a diary, it's like I'm not going to keep a diary, it's like I'm not going to keep a diary, it's like I'm not going to keep a diary.
What is it, what is it?
We're all going to make it.
Non se pa li, diffyoyl.
Anen, don't worry about it.
Or do you know where to start?
For the sick men, there is no problem.
I can't wait to get to the console.
Or you can't put your money where your mouth is.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
It's the same with people.
I'm sick and tired of it.
And then there's Jan Ki.
The illness is what you get.
I'm not going to order it again.
Tell me now and then.
If you are sick, you will die.
One series of people's genres.
manladi yo gen en
We're going to go out and do it again.
It's a great way to put a button on your face.
It's always in the middle of you when you're in the middle of something else and you're in the middle of something else.
A series of people's generations.
In the heat of the moment, I couldn't give up all my children and wives without them.
It's all about you.
Li an an i know of Alòfi and thank you for your help.
I'm grateful to you for not being the only one who knows how to call me back.
You don't know who you are.
Gen gi sa.
You've got a lot of people playing boulboul.
I know who they are.
There is no such thing as a rivalry.
It's not that much.
It's not so much that you don't want to be sick with men.
Let's get to the bottom of this.
Who wouldn't?
Kriye, the son of lasot nan vante.
I was ordered to do it again.
They were born.
I'm going to tell you about them.
It affects them.
I'm afraid they're going to be disappointed.
They make a direct order to the consulate to do what they want to do.
I feel sorry for them.
Let's get to the bottom of it.
It's not like they're going to make a whole bunch of people who don't care.
The baby was born nine months later.
Well, if you are a man, do you have a job, if you are a man, do you have a job?
They've been caught in the middle of two seas of good luck.
There are seven children in the village.
In other words, it's not just me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you.
They're family and friends.
It's been a long time coming.
I was born when the two of them were together.
You're a good man, and you're a good man, and you're a good man, and you're a good man, and you're a good man, and you're a good man, and you're a good man, and you're a good man, and you're a good man, and you're a good man, and you're a good man, and you're a good man, and you're a good man, and you're a good man, and you're a good man, and you're a good man
It's going to be Mouri's.
They died as a child.
Children's children's movements
It's not easy being a kid.
It's not really a death sentence.
The men who had been killed in the battle were the men who had been killed in the battle.
or t ap di.
So, do you have a child or grandchild?
You can't eat or drink anything.
Or you can tell them that there are dozens of men.
So that a child can go to the living room.
If a devil's child is born,
They're just not good enough to live on.
Manman, my mom doesn't make such a fussy move, because my son loves me.
Well, then, too, too, too, there's an order of one card and one.
For example, on a mother's birthday or on a baby's birthday in two months or in three months.
For example, if you have two children, you can have two children.
Good on men, for example, and with onfi
It's good to have two children.
Even a good man is better than a coffeemaker.
Many of you have heard of it.
There are many people who want to do the same thing.
Why are you doing this?
Do you want to go back or do you want to go back?
Karès, there you are again.
Karès, gen b ap then tip da ye.
Whether you're here or not, whether you're here or not, whether you're working hard or not, it's going to be a good party.
OK, thank you, thank you very much, Mikola I'm going to talk to Ridan, I'm going to start with a question.
You've got a good amount of cash going through you.
Now I'm talking about all of them.
I know you're on your way.
Then we went to Zwalzo ki bay a lot of tracks and now we are recording life and living in the pitimi habitan
Fenmel la gen moun color is green
There are a few plenmi and gen genres of my own and my own.
Or hear as well as I do.
They are very beautiful.
Behind the sculpture.
The school is also very young.
The cells are full of color.
I'm with you on this one.
It's such a bad idea.
I'm sorry to disappoint you.
They're coming soon.
Li toukout epi epi
He is always on the lookout for me.
That's how you're going to do it.
It's the same place that makes you do it.
I'm still on the lookout for them.
How do you know the alphabet?
Men on the order of swazo la anvo Sonzwazo
Everything is done by li
One of the colors is gray.
The colour is gray.
They're at the bottom of the list.
The blanks and tires are very thin.
I mean, how do you know what you're talking about?
How do you know?
Se sou pye palmi swiz, swazo sa yo viv.
It's in the palm of my hand.
The palm of your hand is the palm of your hand.
If you don't mind, I'm going to give you some advice.
Bon gade swazo sa a bien m pa konn swab wè
They'll be there for the next couple of days.
Well, I know if I'm going to be able to do the job well for you.
Se wè yon zwazo does not like to make a lot of music
I make music that makes everyone happy.
I've known him for 17 years so far.
This is the only way to redeem li.
Now no one knows if they're going to be able to get a good day's work done.
I'm not going to say anything to anyone who is your boss.
It's a bit of a shock to me.
I don't know if I'll ever know.
You're not going to get it.
Li preske gene is the same length as the resin of the resin.
But it's not as big as the recipe, it's not as big as the two recipes and it's a little shorter.
I'm going to take a look at it like I'm taking a baby underneath a tree.
Or hear well know m ap yo la
The legs and legs are red in colour.
You are the color of Zabriko.
It's not easy to do both.
They're all over the place with good and bad habits.
Now you're the beast and you're the renner.
Li whispered like your whistle.
I've been told to do this.
Since then, they have been on the rise.
They took the relay to the court.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it again.
I'm not sure if it's worth the money, but I'm sure it'll be about three pounds or so before I know what it is.
A white businessman brought a souvenir and some tickets for me.
Or don't you know li
Or bring a couchette and some ties or something.
Or they'll know what they're talking about.
Equity of the genome of
There is no need for people to put an order on things.
It's a great way to get a photo of yourself in this way.
I don't know what to call it.
Other people on the coast call it coast to coast.
They don't know.
I don't know if it's true or not.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to get a photo of my dad.
Even when I'm in a bad mood, I feel like I'm in a bad mood.
It's not about what's going on.
It comes from the same family as ours.
I'm going to look at it this way.
There is a lot more to it than that.
You can't get enough of it.
They're going to be on the receiving end of it.
Men will come under the remembrance with two new greens under the will of the greens.
There is a large amount of white blood cells in the body.
The genome is the same as that of the animal and the grandmother.
If only you had the head of a pen and other large pieces of paper.
They're more of a network.
It's not easy to do both.
It's either black or white.
It's not about the chicken.
It's not even a bug.
All the men who live on this great mountain will rise.
I sing you a song of music that is even better than singing you a sign.
Se like yon ti flit
One of them is playing tank li bel.
I don't know how I'm going to do it.
They see that they are not under the shadow of death.
Li ponn de zeze yo poulè ble.
Do you want me to be with some of you, or do you want me to be with you?
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
There's a lot of music here.
I'm not sure what to do with it.
It's the same with some of the men in the dark.
Se yon zwazo non vwen pi easy aniti
Anwo do li color grey under the vant li wèske blan Li gen yon tach nwa under chak jil
If you're looking for a yellow color, go ahead.
It's not easy for men to see each other.
There is a grey colour in the middle and a white colour in the middle.
I'm going to try and get a new one.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
I love to pose on the top of a tree in Tibet so that I can fly behind you.
Now we are on the banks of the Tiber River in the waters of Tibet.
Or they'll do it for him.
There's nothing I don't know about.
Li ponn 2
3 or so years ago.
There is so much beauty in your soul.
I don't want to hear about it anymore.
Li fanl nichye with pa y nan pyebwa.
I know what I'm going to do with my life.
It's the end of the world for me.
I'm going to finish it.
I don't know who is behind them to dive.
I'm not going to dive in behind it.
It's a thousand miles away.
If you don't dive into the back of the boat, are you ready?
Or believe that we are dead.
Or where the hell is he?
I'm not sure how many times I've seen a new one.
I'm not sure if this is a new one.
I've been trying to figure out how to do that too.
You are a beast.
Between the two of them, he is known to be a bit of a jerk.
It is a genesis of all sorts of things.
I'm going to tell you about the candlestick.
I'm going to tell you about it.
It's time to get back to the top.
I'm going to release the top four generations.
They don't have a new package.
I'm not sure what to do with it.
You know me or I know you.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Men have all kinds of problems and problems in their lives.
It's going to be a big hit.
to the head of the gal.
metou de gal ki as jon
I'm not going to say anything.
So what's the point, what's the point, what's the point?
And I'm ready, and I'm ready, and I'm ready, and I'm ready, and I'm ready.
Don't you know everything about me?
You won't win, you won't win, you won't win, you won't win, you won't win, you won't win, you won't win, you won't win, you won't win, you won't win, you won't win, you won't win, you won't win, you won't win, you won't win, you won't win.
Deba gen lòt nou again
After living in Greece.
I don't think I'm going to be able to find anyone to help me.
Or never.
I'm not going to lie to you.
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to do it again.
I've never been able to get my hands on one or the other.
I've never been able to get my hands on anything.
I don't know any of the other characters.
A, other than virit, virit, virit, noua, noua virit, virit, virit.
Adon, li jan de, and virit sa, gen, gen, gen and virit again.
We've got a lot of money in our pocket and we've got a lot of money in our pocket.
The colour of the powder is always in the air.
This is why I'm going to fix it.
Pi pi rit an an yo regit al bakon lòn nou bakon la
There is no such thing as baking soda.
I'm going to give you a new order, and I'm going to give you a new order.
I'm going to take a picture of it in the next few weeks.
I'm looking for a new one or two.
The same photo was taken of the men.
They'll be there for you.
What kind of photographs can you take?
If you're going to be a beast, you're going to be a beast.
It's easy to say that it's not that easy.
Everybody knows what's going on.
It's not easy for anyone to do it.
It's not what you're looking for.
It's also very expensive.
They have a green color.
Ankyle a green color on the ansonm and watercolor.
They are grey on the underside of the leaf.
Below is a list of some of my favorite things to do.
One of the colors is yellow.
The men are now record-breaking.
Pap will now be jadon
There are two stages in the development process.
Li gen yon ti sang and ki pa ti so
They've done a lot with paycheck and check.
On the other hand, there is no such thing as a free lunch in any of the branches of your business.
I don't know what I'm going to do, but I know what I'm going to do, and I know what I'm going to do.
The men of the village met in a very short conversation.
of the men of an an
Donkou pa konn bay a sa yo.
Konn ponn fenn of zwa
It's too white for me.
A few times yo pa gen ti tach chouch
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
Wim always two we hear, even, ma ponn nou.
Danp yo, how many people are crying, do you know who is crying?
What's the matter with you?
Doesn't that mean, doesn't it, doesn't it mean, that there are people who want to go to Babylon?
So, who is the teacher, from what?
They're not going to be able to keep up with your kids.
They sing preske just like other conzo's.
Konponn sou yon konsa li sing
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
Currently, men do not like to do anything.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it.
It's not like I'm going to be in a van for a while.
That's why we're here today.
There is no such thing as a new baby.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah,
The dog's teeth are already worn out.
Gen yon dwazo, li yon ti chan great envil short, plum ke l kwen ke ti, bek li pwès.
It's just a matter of time before it's over.
Onti jan kolorb ren an odol
Everything underneath the front is almost white.
Li and yon big taj jon are in front of chak zed li yo
It's not uncommon for many people.
They are now grenn move zèb
Men malerezman nou pa jan li fasiv
They like to have the ability to learn or work in the fields.
It's been a long time since I've seen people like that.
They're flying too far away.
A moment later, they came down again.
The men are singing the song of pi pout
Li made nichte atè in the savann
He ran away with his money.
There are twelve different types of tastouy.
or rakonn drazo sa?
Drazo sa ap rastri ton même nou, a look you have to say a.
Or believe it or not.
You can't say that or you can't say that.
I know what it's like to live in the savannah.
I've been to Poland for a long time.
I can't wait to see what you mean.
It's not uncommon to find even a large cup of tea, but it's also a good one.
It's not that simple, it's that simple.
It's very beautiful.
Now we have to make sure that there are no mistakes.
They are very hungry because they eat all kinds of animals.
such as gèp mouj
It's not like you're going to make a mistake.
It's not really a problem.
They are easy and easy to answer when you're not there.
It's too early to tell, and it's too early to tell.
There are no cells and everything that is there is a beautiful green background color.
It's all about the vegetables.
It's all under the hood!
Fal li preske to white
One of the colors is yellow or yellow.
For the sake of clarity, let's talk about what you're talking about.
You're not going to be able to talk.
Li fouye fennich is now what you don't want to talk about.
We have no choice but to do so.
It's too bad.
What, no, no, no, no tea, tea, like killing a jouri, kola or bout?
Or I'll only watch it or I'll never be able to see it again.
There's a lot more to it than that.
Pa gen pri sevalite
an sevalite gen
There is no such thing as a Sifran and there is no such thing as a mountain, even if there are two of them.
They are ready to go to Galbek too.
You know they're either Female or Female.
It's female and female.
The female is the female.
It's the only way to get back on track.
They are not even close to me and I'm going to change them.
If you really see another kind of granegès.
There are more men than others in my life.
Because other people don't like it.
It's the same with the new way of doing things.
Use it or even if it's female.
How do you know who to call?
Se yo an gana Gès li ye
There is a new generation or a new generation.
I am ashamed to admit that I am not in a relationship with you.
Everything else is just like you.
I'm going to get a Gès yo.
If they are the same, if they are the same, well.
That's how I came to call you Wagalèges.
It's a lot of fun, but it's a lot of fun.
There is no photo of me.
Men need to listen carefully to see if they are there.
11 If you have a white hand on your face, you will have a lot of white hands on your face, long, close.
If the rainy season is too hot, you'll even be by the sea.
They almost don't know how to sing.
One of the reasons for this is that it is not possible to make them with a pair of mousetraps or a pair of glasses or a pair of glasses or a pair of glasses.
There's only one pillar of white.
Or do you know what I'm talking about?
A single thorn in the flesh.
How do you know?
There is no problem.
Bon gen napral continue doujou
It's a good idea for you to be a part of it.
The good news is that we've got a lot to do with the whole race.
It's not easy to live in the same city.
Because they're full of redemption.
They are hard to recognize.
It's because they drink.
A child under the influence of a white elephant.
I'm going to do the same thing with a white mark on the back of my head.
The cells are long epi fen
I've always wanted to do something.
They're not going to live forever.
Many, like all the other members of the family, have a great song to sing, but only a few.
They make them, along with other similar species, of palm trees.
Coconut oil is extracted from the leaves of the plant.
They can be made either in the early stages of life or in the early stages of life under a leaf.
They also know how to do what they want to do with a collar and a krachev.
There's a lot that goes into the bottom line.
Jan yo relayed the beast.
Now that I've got a new one, I'm looking forward to seeing you.
Who knows what's going on?
Pale or pale are your men.
Everyone knows that swazo sa yo jwani is everywhere the vil and won won won won won.
There is no such thing as a free lunch in Tibet.
It's just a matter of time.
I'm going to tell you a couple of things.
It's not like I'm going to be under the influence of drugs.
I've been on a white train for a long time.
I'm going to have to pull the trigger on your back.
There is a white mark on the chak cell of Devan and there is a white mark on the colour.
It is now the same as a granégès.
I want you to know.
And all sorts of animals that are willing to give us good service, who knows what they are, right?
Oh, one song ki tiz, tiz, tiz, bakon nou, bakon nenne coffee is a?
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
One of the main reasons for this is that the two sides of the aisle are very close to each other.
You have to live in the rest of the country in such a way that you don't know what kind of person you are.
The area is similar to one another.
Don't even think about me or myself.
Men do or so say they're not the same person as you.
The men picked up a large fire.
What's more, they're working on a new product.
I'm going to do it again.
There are no cells.
Yo tout color
There are two types of cells.
Yo tout color yellow fonse keli
I took out the soviet.
From the back of your head down underneath the fallout to the bottom of your stomach.
There are two things that go down under the shade of anamanen.
Yo gen yon color grey pa l
It's not under the blanket.
There is a large white mark in front of you.
Wherever you are, you'll be fine.
This is a form of swazo as a.
I don't know if you know what I mean.
I can't wait to get to know you.
I can't wait to get back to work.
I don't know if we'll ever be able to see if we're good enough.
That's how it came to be.
Gen tout kalte
Anman kalte sa pou pou know an l revè
The colour of the men is a reflection of the colour of the men.
The men or the women of the poultry.
I'm going to be a police officer.
And the color of the la.
They're on the grill.
On the grill there are ten cards.
I'm looking forward to the new year.
The cube is short.
You'll be able to use it on your bike.
They're not going to be able to do that anymore.
men or recognize li
I'm going to tell you how it's done.
You can hear the sound of your voice.
You can hear the voice of men.
Or maybe it's just a matter of time.
Two cows are attached to each other.
It's a bit of a malfeasance.
I'm not ready for it.
I'm not sure if this is related.
If you're looking for something, you're looking for something.
They are similar to kadye.
The men's colours are yellow and black.
Don't let them call me if I don't know who they are.
It's great to have a small group of men back or short.
Fenmel la gen yon color grey fonse
There's a lot more to it than that, and a few things I'm not sure about.
It's not easy to get a new one.
There is a large white rail above and below it.
You're going to have to clean the bottom of the column.
Both above and below the floor.
It has a beautiful yellow color.
It's a chunky business in the middle.
Like Lozè Yo dwazo the same family with you
You're free and you're free for now.
It's the same as it is now.
You know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
It's not like I'm dying.
I don't know where I'm going.
I'm always on the lookout.
grenn thing or konn bouyou now or
I'm going to cut it off for you.
Or I'm going to do it on my own account if I'm with you.
I'm sure you'll know that I'm here with you.
Who's going to get married?
Onm bannann for example or konn tofe li
I've always wanted to wear bannann and bananas.
I've seen a lot of men and women with other lourds of colour.
Now, there are two colors.
Don't worry about it.
The colour is the same as the other colours.
You don't know the shape of your head and you don't know the shape of other people's heads.
I'm not a man of the people.
How do I know what I'm talking about?
Li will take on the other side of the world.
If I have, I don't even know.
I know what it's like to live here.
I don't know what to do.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it.
I've heard a lot of people say that they're doing it.
It's a bit like anti.
Gen tout type
Answit yon kalit gen yon mawon gen yon joun anm
It's not like I'm going to make a mistake.
It's called a chaponty.
It's the colour of the sparkling wine.
It's not like I'm going to change the color.
I'm very happy with the results.
I either know or believe that he is evil.
Or beasts of burden, or beasts of burden, or beasts of burden, or beasts of burden, or beasts of burden, or beasts of burden, or beasts of burden, or beasts of burden, or beasts of burden, or beasts of burden, or beasts of burden, or beasts of burden, or beasts of burden, or beasts of burden, or beasts of burden, or beasts of burden, or beasts of burden, or beasts of burden,
I don't know anything about both of them.
It's one of those things that I'm not familiar with.
Se Pentad a jouye nou
An animal that knows how to love a lot of poultry is going to die.
You don't know me.
I know how to listen to you.
I know who you are.
I'm going to put you at home and tell you the truth.
It's a good one.
Or do you have such a passion for rabies, don't you?
My little girl, do you know where I stand, or do you know where I stand?
Now, you can't, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you, can you
I know you're coming home and I know you're coming home.
I know I'm going to go home with the code.
This is a code that can be used by anyone.
I've got two big codes.
It's a great code to use.
The code is large enough to fit in with the rest of the code.
Do you know what my code is?
There is also the possibility that there is no such thing.
Jon wel ye la yo is now a mother red
Se pa ban n yo now epi
It's now banned.
One or two generations will go to your home with you.
It's a lot of fun to be a part of.
It's time for you to get your head around it.
I don't know how I'm going to do it again.
For the sake of remission.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again.
Men can't get away with it, and men can't get away with it.
May or now may be retired.
I'm not sure if I know what to call Aske.
Bet and nonri
I'm not going to win.
I'm not going to win.
The men or the animals are the only ones who know.
It's the same as it is now, but it's not the same as it is now.
I'm not born completely and I don't know anything about it.
Donp or dakò a poor sa
I know what it's like.
Or do you know?
If you're an animal or a fasid for retouching connectivity.
Either way, it's going to take a long time.
Everything underneath me is black and white and all blood is gray under me is sandrez m ap wont sou konn sandrez a
I'll see you later.
It's easy to get your hands dirty.
It's just the way it is.
You are now a beast.
I'm not going to lie to you.
You don't know a good song, if you don't know a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song, a song,
I know I'm an animal and I don't have a dog, but I know I'm an animal and I don't have a dog.
It's a beast.
Li wè preske the same gen with Tako
The men do not look alike.
It's because I'm all over the place.
I am long and gouchtabak
I'm going to take a picture of you.
I'm going to give you an example.
Gen yon wong packet twe men yo bon ti ansanble preske cutting head
There is no such thing as a long-term solution or a long-term solution.
Your legs are short.
I'm close to you.
It's not too long or too short.
This is our family.
I'm so sorry to hear about you.
My account is now full of details.
I know what I'm going through and I'm not going to say anything about it.
You've got a lot of money to spend and you've got a lot of money to spend.
That's just the way it is.
I'm going to release it.
One of them, like me, is always there.
I'm going to have to deal with this and I'm going to tell you everything.
gen multiple types.
It's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, you know, it's like, you know, you know,
It's all there.
Balbaren men all of se tout rel yo li
It's all about the kefen.
It's not white.
The cells are white and white in colour.
There are other qualities of good and evil as well.
I'm going to eat all sorts of grains.
And now it's my mother.
Pitimi and the other grann repòt pit
Someone who knows how to profit by killing you.
Everything is good.
Now we have a lot of people.
I don't know if you remember it.
Eee ras ta pa the end of the twinet gen yo is always nan tout bay yo tenmen the same gen yo konn ap fè dega yo
Good quality will do the trick.
There are several types of genes
On the other side of the room.
I'm going to have to get my head back on the ground.
I'm going to tell you what to do.
I'm about a mile away.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
You are almost the same force.
When we hear the same voice, we sing the same song.
I'll sing you a song when you're ready.
ranmi nou a
Or what again?
We're the only ones who can do it.
It's the first time we've seen Blanche's face.
You don't know how to do it.
Pa gen ranmye kouwouj
Yo ranmye bile y ap wa know
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it to the White House.
You've got a lot of good things going on.
I'm going to continue to work hard so that I can end the recession.
It's the kind of thing I'm going to give you.
Gen de type of swazo sa
They are almost the same as the whole train.
Before it looks like it.
It's too big.
I'll give you a brief overview of everything.
You've got to be good at it.
There's also a trailer for the movie.
Prepare to go through your underwear.
The bedroom is the same color as the gray one and the wooden one is the one underneath.
There is no shade, no color, no color, no color or no color.
It's not a big deal.
Think about it when you take a pill.
I'm going to try to make a kakaworim.
It's not as easy as it seems.
It costs a lot of people to buy it.
How many people are on the road?
It's true that you're the only one who knows.
There's a lot more to it than meets the eye, and I don't know if I'll ever hear it.
The color of the skiden ble vagan nou
The color is blue.
I've got a lot to say about you too.
The bad news is that it's too late.
It's a great opportunity for me to get to know you better.
The same female genus has a grey colour and is more common in women than in men.
I'm going to get back to you and I'm going to get back to you and I'm going to get back to you and I'm going to get back to you and I'm going to get back to you and I'm going to get back to you and I'm going to get back to you and I'm going to get back to you and I'm going to get back to you and I'm going to get back to you and I'm going to get back to you and I'm going to get back to you and I'm going to get
The bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad and the bad.
The cancer is still alive.
It's a new year.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
Take it or leave it
I don't know how to play it.
We can't sing or we can't sing or we can't sing or we can't sing or we can't sing or we can't sing or we can't sing or we can't sing or we can't sing or we can't sing or we can't sing or we can't sing or we can't sing or we can't sing or we can't sing or we can't sing.
It's bigger than a pawn.
You are tounwa pre bep yo pwès epi epi epi tounwa pre bep yo pwès
Yo fen long bout ke yo won
Now there are all kinds of fries.
You are now attacking you.
That's how I feel about you and your life.
I'm going to drink a lot.
I have made a great deal of progress in the field of May people.
Even near the plant may a yo konn bay koplèm tou ye
I've seen it all over the country.
Even a garden by the sea is as big as a shovel on the top of your head.
to use the fachin
And you're paying a lot of attention to what you're doing in your niche, and you're good at what you're doing.
Who knows who I am?
When you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry, when you cry.
I can't wait to use it.
It's such a good time for me to believe it's a good time for me.
If they are not relieved or well relieved, they will be relieved.
I don't want to hear about it anymore.
It's the same with humans.
People can run away from their homes.
In fact, they know everything they know about the human condition.
I can't wait to say no.
Or do you have a problem with it?
If you have a garden, you will be able to grow well in a short time and you will be able to grow it.
and the debts to be repaid.
Those pentads, they're all sorts of things, aren't they?
What, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what,
I don't know my son.
On the animal of a palwa or a la, on the animal that loves to live in the fullness of the new species, the good and the bad.
Témidò, E Oristaf, have a series of things, and since you know how to take a package, you know how to take it with you and your life.
I'm a Mason, I'm a Test or I'm a Test, how do I know what I'm going to do when I'm done?
If you don't know how to take the test or how to use it, when you take the test or how to use it, you don't know how to use it.
Ah, like a six, like a six like a fiyi.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
There is no concrete and no concrete.
If you don't know how to do it, you'll know how to do it.
That's how I did it.
Yo klise pan nou you
This is why I'm here.
This is the only way to send a message to the church.
Kay on kay so
It's the first time I've seen it.
This is a story I don't know about.
The men of Jan Moutè a
If you know how to pay for a mortgage, that's all you need to know.
I don't know.
Youtè kay la an kou
It's not just that.
Or maybe you're just trying to buy it.
There's another generation again.
I'm not going to say anything about it.
Or we're going to meet in a fight or a fight.
It's a bit of a struggle for the zombies.
Other people don't even know each other anymore and they don't even know each other anymore.
It's covered.
Or, put your head on, or put your head on, just so you know?
I'm so excited to be able to buy a pair of shoes.
If you buy only on the other side of the door, you can buy only on the other side of the door.
I don't know how many animals I've been carrying.
Now that I'm on something else, I'm on my way.
I'm not going to cover it.
Yo renndwa covered l an kouf
I'm going to cover it up with a bunch of stuff.
Yo renndwa covered l yo
A bout of tannou
It's a battle of wits.
A bout an kou e answit
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
I don't know how to cover it like that, and I don't know how to cover it like that.
Pa wè passion yo konn yo
Yo pa konn di li cover an do chwal
If we do not even have the opportunity to do so, we will do so in four different ways.
I don't know if it's a good idea or not.
The calculator that knows how to do it now.
Is it possible for you to know so much about it?
I'm not sure if I'll be able to use it.
Lichon monte anki jan kou also known as Lichon.
It's not like I don't know what I'm doing.
I don't even know if I'm going to make it.
It is the same as fasion an toumi.
Fasion an do chwal la the same
I don't know what to do with myself.
It's also a cochon.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
It's not just me, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people, it's people
It's now or never.
on two other versions.
On the se ride kay yo faire
How do you know you're not too fat?
I'll have them ready for lunch at the end of the day.
I can't wait to see the rest.
It's my turn.
Release your hand?
It's true, you don't have to call me back.
Well, then, give the farmer his garden, give it to him or give it to him.
Yes, I'm going to store, I'm going to store, I'm going to store, I'm going to store, I'm going to store, I'm going to store, I'm going to store, I'm going to store, I'm going to store, I'm going to store, I'm going to store, I'm going to store, I'm going to store, I'm going to store, I'm going to store, I'm going to store, I'm going to store, I'm going to
I've got other people who can call me too.
Lòt tonyou rele li, premen parapè, rele l joupa, lèfini, rele l ba kadeyè a.
Or do you want to order it again?
No, or I'll say, yon, yon, you know.
If you don't know where you are, you don't know where you're going.
I don't know.
There's no other way to know who I am.
I don't know if there's any other way.
I know that you've been there before.
Good riding for you to do Koum na dou kay sa
Don't give up on me.
The network is either connected to the network or connected to other networks.
How do you get rid of it?
You will be released by Chanmòd
If you don't know how to do this, you're not going to be able to do it.
I'm sure you'll be able to find someone to talk to about Kay Chanmòt.
I'll tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm going to have to change my mind now.
Now I'm with you.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
I'm not going to tell you.
Nan kay chanmout is also included.
I can't wait to see Yon Kay.
who or what?
It's like someone else's death.
For example, if you need to set up a kay
It's not just a story.
If you know or win, you can get up there if you want to be with someone or something.
win or lose.
On the back of your neck.
Listen carefully if you can get up and do it again.
There is no such thing as a lottery ticket.
or pa gen lotti anpò card li
I'm going to have to go through a few short cuts.
I'm going to be proud of myself.
One series of people.
Yo gen kay yo epi before you buy seeds
I've been watching a series of debatables and I know I'm going to believe it.
The men were released.
That's the only way to re-release it.
I don't know if you're going to be able to do it properly.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
We don't know why you're here.
It's not a dizon.
And then on the other side of the door, the door opens to you.
The photo gallery is open to the public.
It's not so much that we're here, it's just that we're here.
I don't know what to do with myself.
You can't beat the man.
It's not a photo.
I'm going to take a look at it.
It's the first generation.
sini safri 2 poto, 2 poto konj.
Don't take the picture.
Konj is not a photo of you.
or pale m la
I'm here to help you.
Where someone can take me to put me on the other side of the world without me?
I put them in a lot of l....
I can't wait to see where it goes.
There is a photo of him.
Or if I put it in my pocket, I'll put it in my pocket.
I can't wait to see where it goes.
I don't know where I'm going.
This is a photo of a rivan m rele l
I'm in the middle of it.
I don't know how many times I'll be able to repeat it.
I don't want you to repeat it.
Why do you want to see me again?
I've been working on everything for you ever since I was a kid.
I don't know if it's true or not.
It's not my fault.
All work is done by me.
and the bay.
It's still the same as Krisyon.
Well, men, if you don't have to do it twice, enmen, you're a manche, a manche.
I don't know what to say, or prepare everything, or put it on, or put it all in your pocket.
What do you think of this song?
Ready to go, ready to go.
Now we're going to meet each other, and we're all going to meet each other.
Men, or one sokay lake.
It's only a.
Or do you do Chapankal sa, what are you going to call me?
There's no way around it.
Gade, well, two kids, aren't they?
How did you get there?
What's wrong with being a man?
What is it?
Are you ready to go?
How did you get there?
All right, look, two kids, two kids, what's up?
Stay ahead of me, all right.
There is no other way to re-release it again.
A pa de
There's a sidewalk in front of the car.
There's no other way.
Travèy in front of Kadriyè
Don't go through my cell or know what you're talking about.
I don't know how to cross the road.
We have travelled through it.
Don't go through with it.
They're going to release it.
Li up iskan wa
No, I'm not going to go.
A lis mann fwon an
They're up there.
That's the way it's going to be.
It's been a long time coming.
They're not going to release it.
Sa, sa, sa you are the only one.
I'm not going to say a word.
It's not like I'm going to release it.
It's time for us to move on to the next step.
We're going to release it as a single release.
This is why I'm so proud of you.
Let me tell you what I can do.
Or order gen gen an yo rele l again
Or do something about a bay.
Or what I can do for you.
or by order of gen anvò or di
It's hard to believe that you're doing it this way.
Take it all together or don't read it.
Don't worry about it.
Lat wè la yo
It's not like I'm going to let you down.
There is no other way I know how to relate to you.
There are other ways to make a living.
I want you to be happy in the country.
Well, I'm with Diesel Lamiye, man, or I'm with you, I'm with you, or I'm with you, I'm with you, OK.
In the meantime, I'm going to tell you something.
I don't know if I'm going to make it yet.
In the end, I made a mistake.
The end of the branch is here.
I am floating with a fleet of men.
I'm going to have to deal with a lot of people who are good and generous because they're going to be able to make ends meet.
I know how to put it on so I'm going to eat it.
I know how to take on white things, and I know why I'm going to spend my life doing them.
for the pencil tire.
If you want to see a bayay blanch
One day I'm going to clean you up and I'm going to break you down.
Yofe chofe enpilè yofe chofe yo pran la
I took the letter.
I'm going to use it to make you feel better.
Men, why am I white with you?
With gentleness, gentleness, gentleness and gentleness, men and women don't give up on you.
I'm all about the bagal la
What's the matter with you?
I'm not going to say anything.
Is everything all right with you?
A friend of a friend of a friend passes you by.
We see everything as perfectly as it is in front of you.
It's all about you.
Everything is ahead of the curve.
There's something in front of you.
One of the main reasons for this is that it's not possible.
It's the first time I've seen it.
Gen mann frontmen louk devèyè
I can't wait to see it.
It's the only way you're going to get back on track.
Don't be fooled by what you're saying.
It's not about the money or the money.
Kadebyan is still in a state of disrepair.
I'm still a big fan of what I'm about to do.
Yon releases the gen a
He put the glouche on it.
I don't know what to do with myself anymore.
I don't know who ordered it again.
That's the only way I'm going to make it.
There is no other way to do this.
It's not like I'm doing anything right now, it's like I'm doing something right now.
In a second, you'll also find yourself in love with a picture of yourself.
How many times in my life have I asked for van la?
I know how to make a series devgay
I don't know if it's true or not.
Don't tell me how you're going to do it.
I'm sure you'll know.
I've never heard of it before.
It's OK to do it with me.
Men, who can take good care of you, with what?
Koubon, don't forget, will you do it with me?
I'm going to be a very close friend.
Okay, donks, you don't have to do this kind of thing with this guy, you don't have to do it alone, you don't have to do it alone.
I don't know if you're going to be able to see the palms on the beach, but you're going to be able to see the palms on the beach.
I'm not sure if I'm going to release it.
Se pa tout non se se se sa k'lè a person to no to yo
I'm going to be fine.
If I were to put something on the table, would I put something on the table?
I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry or I'm not here.
E pa gen order jen an yo weyel again
You're on top of it.
Or fi nou pa gen order gen again
It's not like you're going to get your hands dirty.
They've got your money's worth.
You can't or won't.
They're coming to the bay.
Or you can pen my team or you can pen my team or you can pen me team or you can pen me team or you can pen me team or you can pen me team or you can pen me team or you can pen me team or you can pen me team or you can pen me team or you can pen me team or you can pen me team or you can pen me team or you can pen me team or you can pen me team or you can pen me team or you can pen me team or you can pen me team or you can pen me team or you can pen me team or you can pen me team
It's been a long time since I've been on the road.
It's not like the wind is blowing.
Ben sou tettopot li E or ben sou tettopot li E
It is even under the control of the passenger that the passenger can enter.
"Lord, do I know where you're going?"
Okay, well, I'm going to tell you again, hey, win, retou under a.
Or even a new generation.
Men can't be bothered.
If you want to open the door, open the door.
In a man's faithfulness to the law.
You can come to pass.
I'm sure you'll be able to use it.
I'm going to live.
I'm still living on the edge of my seat.
Yon kon gen kay
It was taken when I made the kay la.
If the members of the Bloc do not know how to do it, they will take you together.
Yo fin bat ee Siman with with with sab on taking tout bay lè sa yo
I'm sure you'll be able to do that.
What to do and what not to do.
That's the only way to stay alive.
Generate something, for example, when you buy something from someone you know.
I'm going to pack it up and eat it.
On the one hand, I can put you on the other hand, I can put you on the other hand, I can put you on the other hand, I can put you on the other hand, I can put you on the other hand, I can put you on the other hand, I can put you on the other hand, I can put you on the other hand, I can put you on the other hand, I can put you on the other hand, I can put you on the other hand, I can put you on the other hand.
I can do it for you.
I'm going back to L..
But I'm looking forward to it.
Somebody up on the mountain wants to make you look for a package too.
Yo pran yo started to set epi
It's just a matter of time before they do it.
They have scored a goal.
Gen yon series of ti tou epi
It's going to take a long time for you to fall into it.
or call me Dlo la jen
Ap pl pl pl plunged into the mouths of men.
Only people or releases li
Well, I know you're a rock star, and you're a rock star.
There is no other way to do this.
Tell me about the other side of the door and tell me about the other side of the door.
I'm going to go to the bathroom.
How do you go about releasing it?
I don't know who you are.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
epi wè ou konn gen yon
It's always been there.
They can't hear.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to keep up with my brother or sister.
I don't even know how to ride a mountain.
I'm sure you'll be able to ride with a really good friend right now.
I'm sure you'll be able to ride the train and ride the train.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
Take it or leave it.
I'm going to get my head around it.
They're right on top of you.
Gen gen to the screen screen.
Yo gen right up the ladder.
That's why they shut down Gonvan completely.
I'm still trying to figure out what to do with myself.
I'm going to try and get back to you.
I'm going to ban it.
men and baptized at the same time.
If you are looking for a 10 zanf Batan.
I don't know about you.
or from Batan to La.
That's the only way I can do it.
I'm not going to lie to you.
That's the way it is.
I don't know you.
I'm not going to tell you.
I'm going to take care of you guys.
I'm going to take a bath.
It's all about the blood.
It's not like I can't do anything about it.
Or the couche at the door.
I'm sure you'll hear a good one if you're in Syria.
There are four ways to get there.
I'm going to do the right thing.
I'm going to make men of it.
Or take it with you.
So I'm going to use it.
Well, enbym, when I'm in a coma, I'm in a coma.
Counsellor, the thing to do is to take the door, cat, for bed.
Ah, wow, you know.
The things I had to do, I had to do.
And the sons of Ziba did the same.
I can't wait to get to the airport.
I'm not going to say anything about it.
You've got a lot to do.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to get them back.
It's a bit of a shock to me.
I've always wanted to do something like this.
That's what I'm talking about.
Or pouse but but the door, open but the door, tap when someone knocks on the door, and open the door.
W ap deyal or make the man.
Let's take an example.
This is how you're supposed to feel.
That's what I'm doing.
He is also a friend of mine.
In the meantime, I'm going to have to make a decision about what I'm going to do with my life.
If I were you, I'd tell you what to do.
It's not like I'm doing anything wrong.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
There's nothing wrong with that.
I don't think I'm going to be able to do anything about it.
It's not like that.
I'm going to do what I can.
That's why I'm here.
You're going to have to make a decision.
If there is such a thing, then there is no such thing.
They're like this.
How much do you want to do?
It's the only thing that makes me happy.
No, I don't want to make you feel bad about me.
King or Queen.
A good order, a fair trial and a fair trial.
That's how I feel about my life.
Good pay is a good pay for sheep or goats.
Get up on the men's side.
Or do it all over again.
men or gwen pa ket kote
ou gwen dway ouvè
or value may be
or gen an thing
You're the one who's making the most of it.
This is a great story.
I'm a big fan of the van.
If you're going to open your mouth, you're going to have to do a whole lot of great things together.
I don't know what I'm talking about anymore.
A great peristyle in the front.
If you don't want to go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, or go to the bathroom, or go to the bathroom.
There is a great deal of confusion about whether or not other people want to see you.
They know a great deal about the world around them.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to pull it off.
One way or two
This is one of the areas where the entire family lives.
It's a family tradition that continues to this day.
One of the most important things is that you're not alone.
Once upon a time, everything was in a state of disrepair.
I'm going to do this.
Or take something you're fraying a latent.
There's something you can do about it.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
That's the way it is.
One more thing.
Another Kay again.
I'm going to tell you about it.
What's the matter with you?
I'm sure you've heard of it.
Here's what I'm trying to say.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do anything new.
I'm not sure what to do with it.
I'm going to make my own income from other people's money again.
I don't even know what to do with myself.
And that's the way it's going to be.
Do you think I don't know how or what to do?
It's so good to be able to do some extreme things in order to pass on new ones.
and pose men or kay la
Or to pass it on to men.
It is not enough to create a wall or a new one on the other side of the world.
Kay sa yo Yo
Don't give up or give up.
Do you want to make a sauce or not?
or li vann
Isn't it the same thing or can it be the other way around?
You are independent of us.
I'm not a good guy.
It's the only way to get to the other side of the world.
That's why we're fighting with other orders.
It's about him and the others.
The card is also yours.
Yo-yo card and grand distances.
and grand distances.
or generate order jan pò or gen order jan pò or gen order jan pò or gen order jan pò or gen order jan pò or gen order jan pò or gen order jan pò or gen order jan pò or gen order jan pò or gen order jan pò or gen order jan pò or gen order jan pò or gen order jan pò or gen order jan pò or gen order jan pò or gen order jan pò or gen order jan pò or gen order jan pò or gen order jan pò or gen order jan pò or gen order jan pò
Or is there a card
Kay sa a
However, if I do or I get it or I get it or I get it or I get it or I get it or I get it or I get it or I get it or I get it or I get it or I get it or I get it or I get it or I get it or I get it or I get it or I get it or I get it or I get it or I get it or I get it or I get it or I'll get it or I'll get it or I'll get it or I'll get it or I'll get it or I'
Why don't you tell me what you're up to?
No, I hear well.
If I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it.
I can't wait to see the whole thing.
What is the meaning of all this?
Believe it or not, it's your fault.
w gen kay or enfilè fin nou plante chandelye tou pa tou tou tout sou kote ka lò
It's not easy.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to keep up with it.
That's the only way I'm going to be able to get back on track again.
That's the only way
There's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
Or do you know how to do it?
or fine-tuning kay
or fine leve and lan
and tiray la
En pou met won of things
won't fit in with you.
It's not like I'm new to the pop-up genre anymore.
There is no other way to know.
Gen onseride people yo gen kay la
I've seen a lot of episodes of the series.
I know I am now in a position to know.
When they look at the things they promise to do, they look at the things they promise to do, and they look at the things they promise to do.
What's the order of the day?
If you have an order, don't always tell me what to do.
Now that I've been there, I'm still here.
It's either me or you.
This is why I'm not going to tell you what to do or what to do about it.
I'm going to win a front door win.
You're going to get a div and you're going to get a div.
The good or the bad plant or the bad plant is to be harvested in order to harvest the good or bad plant.
I'm going to put you on the spot.
That's why I kissed you.
I put it in my closet and put it on good condition.
I've seen a lot of them in the past.
There are many times I've been told to do something about the planch.
It's like someone sitting in a cabinet.
Is it good or bad or is there something wrong with you?
If there is a person who is a person, then there is a person who is a person.
They're going to have to come up with something new.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
Yon jan gen sa.
Who knows if it's going to be good or bad, or if it's going to be bad?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
This is the only way to get rid of them.
I'm not going to be able to do anything else.
I've got a lot of good news for you.
That's why I'm so excited.
I'm not sure why it's so bad.
They know a lot of things about plants.
It's the only way to get rid of a plant.
Or do it again.
It's either good or bad.
men or rete isi
I can't wait to see you again in the next few weeks.
The men or two of a large series of men or two of a large package.
Men or women can't control everything.
Or for a piece.
win, for example, on kay
There's only one thing you can do to win.
Or put something in the middle of it.
or decoupe li.
Ok or decoupage li
I'm going to meet you and I'm going to tell you something.
This is the first time we've seen this.
Yon baray baray li
I'm not going to do it.
Good luck with that.
The men were quarantined.
The quarantine period of the year for men is also included in the calendar year.
Don or met or an bayé for bare challenge a
They're not going to be able to keep up with me.
It's time for me to go back to the drawing board again.
It's not just me anymore.
or in order to re-release it.
In the case of Fonseil Fonse
I don't even know who you are.
This is the only way or the only way.
I'm sure you'll find another one.
I don't know if I'm going to give them a new caregiver.
I've been waiting for you to say yes.
As if I'm going to tell you.
Yes, the ceiling with the top of the ceiling is the ceiling with the bottom of the ceiling.
Let's take a look at some examples.
There is a lot of money in all of this.
It's not like we're going to be able to keep up with the pace of things.
I'm looking forward to the next one.
That's why I'm here.
We're not alone in this.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not, but I know I'm going to make it.
It's been a long time coming.
It's the only way to get to the bottom of it.
A code, for example, is known as E Tanm rad sou li li and is known as yo re li.
If you're moving, you're moving, and you're moving, you're moving, and you're moving.
The commands of the king's household were fulfilled.
Achita en makadere li an an
on moun pay egizanm pral riven nou ebenis
I've been waiting for you to meet me.
How do I know I'm so good at being a good person?
Deyou and Chesev are here.
The concert is going to be held in Chitason so I can go to the concert.
Enfil your foot into a potty shop.
It's your job to get people to listen to you.
What's the big deal?
He's riding in a wheelchair.
or when the person who will make me win with the counsel of the people.
Kenyan releases the song.
I know a lot of people.
I don't know anything about it.
In your living room.
or bay make salon bon tout chair gen chair yo men
Pa gen yon or konn or konn bay yon non apa
Yonf m ap ap ap ap
There's no way around it.
Oubriye, I'm going to do this, cutèy.
A whole bunch of people can do it now.
I'm always good at things I know how to do.
As if I'm going to do it.
They can't stay that long.
In the meantime, I'm going to try to figure out what I'm going to do.
I know you're all right.
I don't know how to do that.
I know that there are three of them.
I don't know what to do with myself anymore.
You're not banned.
Tone is prohibited.
Well, if you're going to ride a horse, you're going to have a big fight.
It's a great way to get a new look and feel.
The order is to be re-released again.
I don't know about the biology.
Reyakonn did not know.
The jw order again i know delete gen
I'm with you on this one.
I don't know how to do that.
That's why I'm here.
Seem tabè a m te pozokesyon
While there is no rezacteman, there is no pozokesyon.
There is no doubt that the Egyptians are the ones who are responsible for this.
It's like they're on their feet.
On foot on the Tèt la kond tou won't die with a real one
I'm going to tell you about your grandmother.
I'm in the middle of it.
I can't wait to see what happens.
It's time to move on to the next step.
The men's competition is open to men.
If I can kiss you, I can kiss you.
I can't even kiss you.
Even the men and women who are members of the society are very good at it.
Since the beginning of Achitan's career.
There is no such thing as a tachez.
It's all about living now.
Everything or now are men
It's not all about life.
Everything is not yours.
The same goes for the two big ones on the rye and the Pi chak shapes on the new balloon.
on the other side of the world.
Payizan sa m te dou consò
with a great deal of consolation.
The thing is, alas!
There's a lot more to it than that.
I don't want to sit in a chair like that.
I'm not sure I'm going to be able to do it myself.
They are prohibited.
I don't know about you.
I don't know why I can't be good.
They are about 3 feet long.
They are so generous.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
They were mentioned on a plaque.
They've changed their minds.
It's not your fault.
They know how much you're worth.
I'm in a relationship with lodina salò
Now, as a question, there's only one thing I want to know.
I'm going to make a record.
That's how I came back.
Tanko bay for the people who live here.
I don't know.
I don't know who he is.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
That's the kind of thing that's going on.
Prophet Kachita sou sou li epi
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
You're going to end up with a lot of problems.
To put it this way, I'm going to put it this way, and I'm going to put it this way.
It's time to get back to the rocks.
He or she is a member of the Kivuet Brotherhood.
What's the matter with me again?
I'm going to walk, for example.
Or make an arrangement.
You'll be able to use it for a long time.
What do you think I'm going to do with it?
There's no way I'm going to be able to keep up with you.
It's the only thing that makes sense.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do next.
I believe that this is a series of deals.
I know how to use my phone right now, but I'm not sure.
I don't know what to do.
Underneath the vessel, I put a few bays for books.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
The men can also put on a piece of paper.
At the same time or with continuity
And then there's the kiss or the pramete and then there's the y.
The other bay is the provision of an envelope to the seller's account or to the seller's account.
Or I'll put in the gadmen for rent.
After or after I'm done with it.
There's nothing wrong with that.
It's the day I was born.
I can win or lose a pack of rads.
Gen or gen on thing or kon mete li
It's not like they're ready to wash.
If you're going to clean up your house, you're going to have to clean up your house, you're going to have to clean up your house, you're going to have to clean up your house, you're going to have to clean up your house, you're going to have to clean up your house, you're going to have to clean up your house, you're going to have to clean up your house, and you're going to have to clean up your house.
Or I'll put it in a bottle.
I put it in the window.
In the window of the window is Dan and Dan.
We've got a lot of men on our side.
There's nothing else but great things I know I can do.
Gen or rad bay ladanmi do you know
I know.
Gwo pa pa pa rad, who serves for yoi vayi isam, what do you wear for yoi vayi, who is yoi reyisanm?
Kay la men gen.
The good thing is that I know how to live life to the fullest.
I used to put on two large beds.
It's the only thing I can do.
an peristit lwa
No matter what happens, I have to live quietly in my room.
It has a large base of li
I don't know how to drink, but I know how to drink.
I know how to release it.
I don't know what it is.
I'm going to take a look at the pros and cons of it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
I'm not going to kiss you.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
So much so, that I've been able to post some great photos of myself in my tache and inside.
The two of them put on a cake.
I put things together.
There's no other way around it.
Yes, it is true.
I don't know the man.
There are eleven people in attendance.
They are finely composed.
I'm fine with the comics.
I'm going to end up with a condo.
I finally took it.
They're going to make sure no one else is on paper.
What do you think of it?
Who's the photographer, who's the photographer, who's the photographer?
Do you know anything about the book that I believe is that twase 11 twase I put in twase one bout with one relay?
So only in relay, li va gen lòt non, portrait bent la?
It's about who's doing it.
fond kouche pou dòmi an koto
He is one of the few people who have asked me to do so.
You live in your bed.
It's been a long time coming.
It's not the same as Sebenis's.
Liposuction is the most common type of lipopoly.
I'm going to tell you a lot of things if I tell you or someone else.
I'm going to take a break.
You can do something like this.
It's just a matter of time before it's over.
But I'm still waiting for another one.
I'm ready for another episode.
I put it on.
I'm sure you've heard of it before.
For me, it's the only way to get paid.
It's not carbonated.
It's not carbon that's going to relieve it.
Men can be likened to men.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
Kat pike a.
Mondap, well, I don't know if there are any others who are still in the men's shoes, but underneath the men's shoes.
If you can do that, you can do it.
I'm the only one who's got it.
Or I'll see you later.
I've got a lot of things going on.
You don't even know what you're getting yourself into.
Believe me, people who don't know how much money they have to spend, even if they don't know how much money they have.
Would you like to make Zennat or do something about it?
An essay on self-realization and self-realization.
I'll never know again.
Or, at least, you've got it.
It's a man's way of life.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to keep up with these guys.
Ijan yo releases li
I can't believe I'm doing this or something.
I'm with you on this one.
You've got a lot of people on your side.
I'm still here with you.
Don't forget to put your child in bed.
Some people still have a pack of clothes to wear.
Ranje sou person na pa egzan to put the child in the couche kiyan yo rele sa other tayan nan yo rele li yo yo
Put your kids on the couch.
An adult has the ability to put a child to bed.
It's the other way around.
Alje ranje is the reason why i don't know what to do.
Alje ranje kabann and oun tan
I'm going to try to get my hands on it.
Or put them on the table.
But I know how to order again.
I don't want to order again.
Or they don't order again
I don't want to live here again.
I'm not sure I'll ever be able to do it.
What are we going to do?
All around you, all around you.
Well, if Gonzo is there, there's a chance.
I don't want to call you tomorrow, but I want to tell you something I've never heard before.
The guy you know put under your head.
It's the kind of guy who even knows what he's doing.
They've been there before.
It's not like I'm going to eat soy sauce.
The only thing I know is how to take it.
Youre foure lanm tann
Li gen yon releases it again.
If there's something I don't know about you, I'll put it on your face.
But then again, it's not the same.
I've never been white before.
It's the only way to get rid of them.
I'm never going to cry if I know how to cry.
Bakon, nunni, li bonn, li bonn on fabrics of all colours but they are made of it, cold li li li li put on your carbon.
Kouvre li, if there is a series of debagay men.
I know how to sleep in your bed.
I'm sure you'll be able to use it.
Soul tapole sable a
I'm going to appeal to you.
Gen releases sa
They have many choices.
I've always had a hard time with my teeth.
If you don't want to go to the bathroom, you can go to the bathroom.
It's like a seventh of a kind.
Something to do right now.
They are born outdoors.
I've always wanted to do something special.
If something in the past doesn't win, let's say Benis knows how to do it.
I don't know what to do with myself, I don't know what to do with myself, I don't know what to do with myself, I don't know what to do with myself, I don't know what to do with myself, I don't know what to do with myself, I don't know what to do with myself, I don't know what to do with myself.
There's no other way to do it.
In the past, there were examples of what it meant to say.
Something someone used to put on the radio.
I'm going to put the card in your pocket.
So only or rede
Only so or rede
There is no way to get rid of them, and there is no way to get rid of them.
I don't want to hear about Gonjan right now.
The men were not ashamed of winning the battle with David.
Don't buy your boat.
Have you ever heard of the tale of a young man's death?
We know that there are people who come from a war zone.
Or do you ever hear me say something to you?
Or do you know your teeth?
Mal, I know metrat together, but I know redle lonjan?
Mèt la nouvelle place is very clean.
You're the one who showed me how to clap your hands.
You're going to end up with a lot of things that you're not going to be able to do.
What's the big deal?
If the same door opens, what will happen?
Li was born in Kourè preske Kourè sa
It's not the same thing as listening to other people's music or listening to other people's music.
I'm going to record it on the radio.
The only device that is capable of methane is a radar device.
I'm not going to make a decision about anything.
For example, we can use the epi
I'm going to take it with me.
That's what I'm doing.
I'm going through it like this.
When I look at the post I don't know what to do.
You don't know where you're going to end up.
You can't do anything that you don't want to do.
There is no other way to go.
One passing bay prope a look at all the two of us
It's the only way to get rid of them.
Is it wrong to drink wine or not to drink it?
Li lan wine.
Now, if there is no wine, there is no food.
There is a limit.
Yes, they are alive, but they are alive.
The wine is clear, so don't say, it's wine.
They're really good.
If there is wine in the lamp, what shall I do?
It's something you don't want to do when you're doing something that you don't know how to do.
I can take it and I'll give it to you again.
I'm going to tell you a little bit more.
The wine plan will include a car.
I'm going to the general meeting.
There's nothing I can do about it.
Gen on ba a par e.g. or gen right buy
Where are you going to get your money's worth?
The men of the wine boat li
It's like that in a boat.
Bon bay and yo take what you're doing.
I'm going to take the money and I'm going to put it in my pocket.
When you're finished, you're passionate about food.
It's all over the place.
I'm dressed up as a straight man and I want to be your man.
Understand how to do it.
When men are ready to return to their homes, they are ready to return to their homes.
Gen konn wouy
There's no such thing as anything that's going to shine on Kay.
It's as if I'm going to say or I'm going to take a cotton swab and roll a cotton swab.
So that they can put them in after they put the gas and the lime in their batteries.
And chande bay as a whole.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
There's no way around it.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
If I'm not a man, I'm not a man.
What do you think I'm going to do?
I'm not going to be able to do it again.
It's all about getting back on track.
Bech la on a lap and a row and roll as well as a good enben donk or wine from m m li r rel
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again.
I don't know if I'm ready for it.
Men's lights are on, and I'm going to go for four.
There are four types of ladonnman or ladonnman.
I'm going to go out with you.
And then there's a time when peace is the only way to lead men to peace.
A gen order gen an wè rete tanpò
It's the same as when you're wearing a hat.
It's a long way off.
A generic order is issued once again.
Then you'll be able to put your money where your mouth is.
Don't be so hard on yourself that you don't know a guy who works hard even if he's working a lot elsewhere.
I'm going to buy a bad one.
Or I'll send you on when you're ready or when you're ready.
The idea is to bring the whole family together.
What's the matter with you?
That's a lot of money.
Things I don't know how to do right now.
Who's going to do it now?
It's the only thing I know how to do right now.
If we don't get to see him, if we don't get to see him, or if we don't get to see him, listen carefully.
There is no longer any order to do so.
The lake is full of wine.
There is no longer any order.
Or on the order of Jan again
There is no such thing as an order of magnitude.
I don't know what they are.
I'm going to tell you what the hell happened.
Then there's who's going to do it right now.
I'm going to put on my shoes and I'm going to put on my shoes and I'm going to put on my shoes and I'm going to put on my shoes and I'm going to put on my shoes and I'm going to put on my shoes and I'm going to put on my shoes and I'm going to put on my shoes and I'm going to put on my shoes and I'm going to put on my shoes and I'm going to put on my shoes and I'm going to put on my shoes and I'm going to put
There are three things they are doing right now.
What am I doing now?
I'm going to kill them.
Empi bonch chan ki vin dòmi is included in the san lanyari
What happened to chan chan an dòmi la?
That's why you're here.
She's the only one who knows how to drive.
We're going to have to make a decision.
The beginning and end of a gallery.
Or use it for the sake of convenience.
The two generations of the relayed lfyi l..
Anken, good, good.
That's the only way you're going to get things done.
Or, say, how do you know where you're coming from?
or mete onchodye
Or put on a pair of lourdes 3 times to meet a pair of lourdes.
The good news is that you're going to have to keep it a secret.
I'm going to tell you how I feel.
There are three of them.
If you've ever been in a relationship, you've got to put your feet on the ground, or you've got to catch a fish.
Don't worry, I'll be back in the car again.
There are still other generations.
One day I heard that something came out of something that I hadn't thought about before.
Or take a deep breath.
It's the only thing I can do.
Or something else or something to put on your face.
This is why I called you Li.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that, but I'm sure I'm going to be able to do that.
They don't know how to banquet.
It's all right with me.
Set the key to the banquet.
One series of people trayizanm few prat few of
Or know or gen right?
It's either the same thing or it's not the same thing.
Gen yon series of men mank ap chache la ti bayyò to have great-great-great-great-grandchildren
It's like releasing Zalin.
It's not about your goal or your right to do something.
You'll also be able to see a young reliever.
When I need a lemon, I need something more than a cup of tea.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
There is no other way.
It's the first time I've ever had a problem.
What kind of people do I want to be with, but when I'm with you, I want to be with you?
If you're going to bring a new product or service, you're going to need to pick up a new package.
Now we have a man or a woman.
There is no order for you to return.
Take it or leave it.
The order is always new.
Don't worry, I'm not going to be able to do it.
We can't wait to see what happens next.
If I don't know what I'm talking about, I'm not going to be able to get back on my feet.
If you don't, you're going to get methane.
You don't have to be a fan of the way things are done.
I'm not a fan of this game.
Don't worry, we're going to get a release.
There's no other way I'll be able to play again.
There is no such thing as a corporation.
If the phone is flat, it's flat.
They're almost flat.
The new phone is coming from the same place.
They don't know what's going on.
They're not good enough.
I can't wait to find out what's going on.
Take, for example, your research.
There is a package of packages available tomorrow.
A fine ball of fire.
It's not a big deal.
Finish the ball.
If someone gives an example of a program that meets the needs of others, how can I do it?
It's a dead end.
I'm going to do what I want to do.
On which side of the table can you eat a dish or a chapo without soap?
What's up with that?
You have to follow the order you are given.
Or what kind of a breath.
Or know if you're looking for M.
It's your teeth or teeth.
Don't exhale or take a charcoal or put it in a recho.
What are you going to do, or what's going to happen?
Don't be fooled, for example, by the fact that it's not the same.
I've never met a man or a woman before, and I've never met a man or a woman before.
They can't.
They don't have a flannel.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
I'm going to blow my breath away.
I'm going to do the same thing.
Don't be fooled or discouraged.
What kind of a man is he?
It's okay if you don't know what you're getting yourself into.
I've got a code for it.
Take, for example, the type of charcoal I've always worn.
I'm going to tell you about it.
One of the main reasons for this is that it's not easy.
It's the only one I'm releasing.
Look on the kay or look on the top of the tower and the bottom of the tower.
Anlè and yon rule l
so were regle li
Give me the lamp.
I'm not the only one on Earth.
Who am I and who am I?
It's the same person you're looking for.
We don't know who it is.
I don't know what I'm going to do with it.
I'm not going to lie, but I'm not going to lie.
Have you been on a series for months?
It's all about the gen lot
Fi months and Li pa gen lòt nou again
Gen yon series of debay people use to drink twice.
You can do a series of debays.
It's all about how you feel.
They have a great deal of wheat.
We've got a new way of working with you all together.
I'm going to take a look at the two of you.
I'm not going to let you down.
He speaks very well.
Yes, and commens.
sil pa a.
I told Kalbas about my mom.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to do anything for my mom.
What's the matter with you?
I'm going to take the word for it.
It's not about Kalbas.
I'm not going to take Bokit for a second.
It's good if we don't go to Bokit
I don't want to take my mom for granted.
I'm going to take a look at some of them.
Men don't want to talk about Mom and Dad, they want to talk about other things.
I'm not going to take this for granted.
W ap di pran
Take it or leave it Malman too
Primen pa gen lòdi an yo rele sa
He's a good leader.
There's something about people I know who can win and who can win and who can win.
I'll tell you what to do when you have two children and I'll tell you carefully before breaking the story.
I'm not going to break my heart, I'm going to break my heart.
Breaking down the yansalab ory se yo konn di lòdi chante o
It's not like I'm going to break it down, but it's not like I'm going to break it down.
All the men together
Li yon dway gen e sodium Li gen dwan t gen of dishes
When you break up the dishes, you're going to have to change your mind.
I don't even know what to eat.
I'm not sure if it's the same person or not.
It's not enough to break your attention.
Be careful not to break the walls.
It's not a bad thing.
Be careful not to break the salt of the earth.
You can either party or you will die.
I'm going to tell you what I want.
I've got a lot of stuff I can put in water.
If you put water in it, you'll keep the road running.
Or make a lamp in my mouth so that I can drink water.
He will give me everything I need to know to make it happen.
How do you use it, how do you use it?
What are you doing here?
It's a new kitchen I'm going to throw at you.
Or put your problems on the table.
Ap rekis anpò
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
Akisa yo birthday or gen how yo birthday
Do you want to know if it's true or not?
It's all in your head.
Yon pran men
Canne Aria gen is very good at it.
There is a great deal of confusion.
They don't do it with you, they don't do it with you, they don't do it with you, they don't do it with you, they don't do it with you, they don't do it with you, they don't do it with you, they don't do it with you.
That's why I'm here.
with you or with me.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
You can open it again, or you can find something else, or you can find something else, or you can find a package, or you can find something else.
They're born with it.
They were born here.
Or condan I've put a lot of pressure on you.
I was born with a tooth, a tooth, okay.
Is there anything I don't know about?
You're a big businessman, and I'm a big businessman, okay, good, and what else do you know?
If you put on a new kit, the kit is ready.
They don't want to touch you, they don't want to touch you, they don't want to touch you, they don't want to touch you, they don't want to touch you, they don't want to touch you, they don't want to touch you, they don't want to touch you, they don't want to touch you, they don't want to touch you, they don't want to touch you, they don't want to touch you, they don't want to touch you.
Well, what's the big deal?
How can I get to the top of my head?
What's the point of taking the plz?
Genyen k can take more than one person to another.
I'm going to tell you another story that's going to happen.
Bokit la take the same purse of water that you can take.
One canayi can take more water to a bowl.
I'm going to take more water to the other side.
I'm not sure what I'm doing here.
If I tell you the way things are going, I'll, well, in order to be able to talk to you again, I won't talk.
Do you want to spend the rest of your life with me?
Well, if you've ever heard of it, you'll find it.
When you're done with the water, you're done with the water.
Great things I've put on code that can be used to clean water.
If you want to know what's going on, you need to know what's going on.
Something else I'd like to do is to find a way to bring water up a mountain.
It's not like I'm crying anymore.
There is no such thing as "Amen" or "No".
I'm going to give you a new one.
It's a good thing if you don't know how to draw water but you don't know how to plant a plant.
And then there's the fact that it's a re-release.
or grade li epi
I'm going to take the water out of the tank and I'm going to fall.
They're in the process of breaking up.
or make or break them.
Bon sa t break a sil pa break ba or gen lwa lwa pran ti balò my balò Geradon
I'll tell you when it's time.
There are many things or people who drink the water of the Kalbas.
Are there any other ones?
You're not going to be able to tell me about your brother or sister.
I'm going to get some water.
There is no limit to the number of times a person may be permitted to enter or enter.
I'm with you L.
Yeah, lans li, you only know what you're talking about.
It's the same thing now that I know I'm falling for the phrase.
I know how to thank you.
I know how to take a woman with me and how to make her feel and how to make her feel.
We've got a lot of potatoes in the potatoes, and we've got a lot of potatoes in the potatoes.
If someone takes a poem, a poem, or a poem, who will take a poem and talk about it?
So retire your words
Or you may need a pale de kalbas.
The men are fighting.
I'll tell you what.
One day I'm going to take a drink.
I'm going to take a drink.
They were born the same.
I don't know where I'm going to get my water.
The men who wanted me to make contact with Wouj
They're the ones who've got it all figured out.
It's the same thing as a coat of arms.
I've known an adult for a long time.
I don't want to be a full-fledged cop and I want to be a full-fledged cop.
Yes, that's the only way to call li.
How am I supposed to wash my face with herbs?
No, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no. No, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no. No, no, no. No, no, no. No, no, no. No, no, no. No, no, no. No, no, no, no. No, no, no. No, no, no. No, no, no. No, no, no, no. No,
Either before the epi, or after the mold, or after the meal, or now.
It's the only way I'm going to survive.
or pa konn gen an
I'm not going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you
This is a great opportunity.
I'm here to help you.
I've been doing a lot of things that I've always wanted to do.
It's been a long time coming.
I've been waiting for you to come back for me.
They know how to wash a sheet of paper.
Well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well,
I know how you feel about it.
How do you know when to send a letter?
The vowel is a vowel.
You've got a boat here.
I can't wait to get my hands on a premen or anvwon in men.
I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know,
I'm called Timamit, I'm called Bwatou, I'm called Bwòkal too.
The other side of the equation.
I didn't take it very well.
I want to protect myself from water.
In the meantime, I'm going to take it all in.
or someone to draw water for the garden.
I'm in the mood for something.
I want to make sure that you're doing the right thing or the wrong thing.
What is the value of what I can take with me when I'm born?
The two men will be in the garden.
Bring them on the kalbas
They can carry on with you.
on gal nou itbin water
They're going to be in the garden.
They will be in the garden.
They will be in the garden of La.
You can bring your own pocket.
You can bring your mommy.
You can bring me something.
I've seen a lot of the anti-pokit stuff.
I'll be there soon enough.
Anpote yon bottle la like a shrimp for many people and
They can bring at least one litre of water to the bathroom.
The answer is that it can lead to a crisis.
It can be depayed.
They can carry at least one gallon.
You answer the question of how to get to your destination.
rede konse lòt bay
I know I can do it.
I know that you're going to be burdened even if you're going to be burdened.
I know what I'm going to tell you.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I know poulè blanch
Tipokit yo anse yo reye yo ledada yo pa rele yo know things yo know
I don't know a woman.
I don't know if I'm going to play in the big leagues.
I am a very brave man.
It's not like you're going to be white.
I'm in a water bag and I'm going to bring my men.
My father and I were born again.
I'm not in my room anymore.
Speak like a boat done now.
I bought it and bought it for my birthday.
How do you know I'm going to do it?
Anka wotchou bon dakou
There's no way I'm going to be able to keep up with what's going on.
They're going to have to wait a year.
ifè ta amfayans
If you don't like it, you'll be fine.
Or give someone else something else in return.
You can use any color.
We don't know what's going on.
I know how to draw water.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to keep up with my grandparents.
A bottle or bottle of wine.
You can bring a couch or you can say "I'm sorry".
I was born with a lot of different things going on.
Is there anything in the world that I don't know how Wop looks to me?
I don't know what I'm saying.
The men of the gen la
Why is it that you are born?
It's not a fluke.
I can't keep things to myself.
Or at least two high schools to tell you how well you're doing at school.
It was designed by Tijan Koufen.
sa only, m..
I'm in the middle of nowhere, so I can decide whether to do something right now or what to do next.
I'm going to buy a reboot.
I'm going to release it.
Bon sa only or preserved in the garden.
Men or women or women have the right to know how to behave.
I can't wait to get back to you.
Take it or leave it.
They were either born or raised in the country.
or gen tou an touwon asset la
The tank dishes.
I'm not sure what to do with it.
They were born on the same day.
They were born anmay Bon se sa only Asyèt ki yè vagay or kontn sèvi nan yaden Chodye
We're going to eat again after that.
I'm going to come to a party or a party so I can keep my eye on you.
The festival is celebrated on the occasion of chodye.
That's what they're doing.
I'm not going to say anything about it.
Or where is the thing to do Kalbas m pr pral swal in the garden
I'm so excited to see you again.
I'm going to take it for granted.
I'm going to take a look at it.
It's not your fault.
It's not your fault.
Or now
want now ki yon want now
Or want a perfume pou
Or do you want to lose a job?
It's the first thing I've ever done before.
Pre or pre do y y
or prepare to do so.
I'm ready to make the most of my life, and I'm ready to make the most of my life.
A man is the only man who can serve.
I can tell you all.
It's the first time I've seen them.
I don't know how to tell you I'm not going to tell you I'm not going to tell you.
You've got to put in the keys.
I'm going to give you a chance.
Thank you very much and I'm glad you're here.
I don't want to serve anyone else.
I'm not sure if it's the same person or not.
The kitchen is equipped with a bowling alley and a bowling alley.
The people behind me, no, if you want me to tell you, I know what you want me to do.
The people who made the video were one of you, the video, the video, the video, the video.
I'm a member of this group.
And after living the same life, I'm still here.
I can't wait to see what you're up to.
I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results.
I'm going to give you a little bit of advice.
I'm going to give you the good stuff.
If you want to know everything about it, you can go to the bathroom with your bag or talk to someone else about it.
Or defon nou sògen en or defon nou sògen in or defon nou sògen in or defon nou sògen in or defon nou sògen in or defon nou sògen in or defon nou sògen in or defon nou sògen in or defon nou sògen in or defon nou sògen in or defon nou sògen in or defon nou sògen in or defon nou sògen in or defon nou sògen in or defon nou sògen in
It's not a good ending.
Now I'm going to continue to use it for a pillar, for example.
Who are you?
Or take your mother.
I met a few kings who wanted to help me.
Or you'll want me to be good at it or you'll want me to be Wap moulè
Don't be afraid to ask someone to help you.
I know how to do it.
I'm going to tell you about my mother.
I'm not going to tell you what I'm going to do next.
I'm not sure if you'll be able to send me an e-mail or not.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
I'm sure you'll be able to find your way around it.
You are my mother-in-law.
I'm going to moulen an
I can't let you know.
I'm going to try it again.
If they don't, they're going to kill the baby.
We don't really know what we're talking about anymore.
It's going to be a good one.
It's gray and it's gray.
The genesis of a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing or a thing
I'm going to take a look at it and I'm going to tell you about it.
And then I passed, and then I passed.
I'm sure you'll be able to find a way to help me with my needs.
or do or fwon pitimi
or bathe pitimon
or need al pran pitim epi
Or the need for an examination to remove objects from the victim's body.
I've been waiting for you to come over for me.
I'm going to take a look at it.
However, if you have a child who is in need or need, you will be able to take care of them.
I'm not sure what I'm doing here.
No one is going to do anything about it.
I'm going to take this line up with someone again.
For example:
It's a good ride for people who know what they're doing.
It's either good or bad.
I'm going to tell you who I am or who I am.
We don't know what to do with ourselves, and we don't know what to do with ourselves.
This is not a case.
Tow tow tow fine gaje mayòk la
I don't know what's going to happen if something happens.
I'm going to play the game.
I'm going to play the game.
We are no longer men and we are no longer living in the same place.
I'm going to call it a day.
Don't worry about it.
Sov di la gade graj natè to know now a
What's the problem?
Conm gen sot granpil quality
Bon swal la kay yon person I'm coming with you now
Yon son bay flat li
They're going to run away.
They ran them off.
Men, how can you save me?
Sa yo bon, yo put on both men and women.
Yes, if you are a nun, but if you are not, it is something that happens to men.
If you're going to take it or leave it, you're going to have to take it or leave it.
Bay ki tandan li yo konn pike bay pou mann yo vyen rele
And I know how to cut it.
On Christmas I know how to do everything.
It's not a good idea to make a mistake.
But yes, that's why I'm here.
I'm going to tell you a story or two.
You need to have a mini-trust so that you can use it.
Or need a mini-fide
I don't need to tell you anything.
I'm going to do this for you.
Well, how can you tell if you're running away from me?
Only the Sonsa run the yo di or well mè lisi, Oukenbe tou de, or gen lwa of any.
I've spent a lot of time on my own, and I've spent a lot of time on my own.
You don't have to be ahead of the curve or win.
Men or women believe that they are the only ones who can do it.
I'm here to help you.
Wherever you are in the kitchen, you will be called Gen Lès.
I'm going to have to do it myself.
It's a bit of a waste of time.
It's all the same.
It's all the same.
You're the same person.
I'm not going to be able to do it again.
I don't know what to call it.
I don't know.
I don't know what to do with myself like that.
It's the only thing I can use right now.
Where do you see them?
or fouwe l
I can't wait to see what happens next.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
If I fall so good, I will fall so good.
I can't listen to it or play it again.
I'm not sure about the soundtrack.
When I was so young, I knew I wasn't going to die.
Or do you know?
I'm going to tell you a great story.
This is a general problem.
It's the only thing I know about coffee.
It's the same with sa.
Release the gen bag.
Even if you know how to make coffee with men or women, that's fine.
It's the only thing that makes sense.
In the blink of an eye.
It's not that easy.
I'm going to tell you a story.
I've never had a cup of coffee before.
Two drinks.
Take a cup of coffee and drink it.
Well, can I get you some coffee?
So, coffee can be good, coffee can be good, where can I go again?
I drink too much or I drink too much.
You can't do it too well.
It's either a good idea or a bad idea.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Now you know what I mean.
No, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't, they can't
No, I don't know, if you're going to make coffee and drink it, or if you're going to drink it.
People or things can hurt you.
Don't be fooled by some of the big ones.
How do you know how to make coffee?
Is there coffee in the world?
Gen de moun ki di m baray men cafe tel chan an moun
Li baray men's coffee is too strong.
I'm too clear about that too.
Do you have an order to do what, with what?
I've seen what I can do.
I'm going to say goodbye to you.
What do you think I'm going to do next or next?
Men, who, what can you do?
Send me an e-mail to do it.
I feel like I'm wearing it.
I like to put on a promising grenn.
I'm sure you'll know when it's over.
You don't want to retire your coffee and you don't know what to do with it.
I'm sure you'll find a way to make sure I'm a good man.
I'm not sure what to do about it, but I'm sure I'll get back to you.
That's why I'm here.
We're not even close to that.
I promise I'll make you a cup of coffee and we'll eat and drink.
If you're going to do something with it, you're going to have to make a cup of coffee.
They are very good.
I'm going to talk to you about coffee and I'm going to tell you about it.
Men can make good coffee.
The preparation of the gen pout preparari
or gray coffee.
They've made a lot of progress, and they've also put a lot of effort into it.
You're on a gray leaf.
You don't have time to drink coffee, or drink water, but if you don't drink water, that's all.
Under the terms of the agreement, you will be able to retain the rights of the parties to the agreement.
I have to pay attention and take several Kabare.
If you don't know if you're going to be able to make it or not, then don't do it.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it.
The same thing happened to me when I was a teenager.
One big bottle of water.
Don't order it again.
There is a series of things I know to keep me cutting off my genome.
I know how to put myself in the right place at the right time.
It's not easy being gay.
They'll talk to you in the morning and you'll know how to use them.
I'm going to gout the manche.
Okay, all I can say is that you'll be fine, but if you listen to me, I'll be fine.
But at the end of the day, it's the only thing I know.
Even if I don't have a lot of time, I'll be there.
Tout gen anrodi li gen
But now I know.
Good afternoon and see you again.
We'll see you again afterwards.
I know what I'm doing.
There's no order yet again
Yes Sil Long Long
I'm still not sure what else to do.
Sil Long Kout we
It's been a long time since I've been around.
I'm not going to be able to do it again.
The person who has been the face of you is the one who has been the face of you.
I'm sure you'll find a way around it.
As a man, I wanted to be a referee.
I know the house of one of my friends from the other side of the street, but I'm not sure what to do about it.
They put it in the list.
There is no one to tell you.
Keep the two of them together.
Thich Nhat Hanh retired from the sport.
That's what I'm doing.
A tonne or seven?
I don't think it's because they're a big group of men.
It's not gratte w
Se gratte ak gratte w
It's a new way to go.
I know what I'm talking about.
The good news is that we're not going to be able to do it again.
I don't know where I'm going to get my water.
I've been waiting for you to call me back.
It's the only way to get water.
I don't know what to do with the water.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to say or do.
Get some water from here.
If only or by taking water.
or take some water from the sauce.
Or take some water from your mouth.
or take water from the lake.
If, for example, there are two or three such large openings,
Take it or leave it.
Take water from the basement.
I'm the only one who's going to be able to do other things.
sankou o gen
I'm not going to say anything about it.
Or take a glass of water.
That's where the base is.
The police put in a door where they could find everything new and everything that was left in the water.
In the water's edge.
Ap for water
There is no one place but there are several places to enter.
Everything quickly and efficiently floats under the water.
I'll be there for you too.
You've been there, done that.
I can't wait to get out of here.
What are you going to do about it?
I know what it's like to live under a tree.
Yo fouye tè a empi
I know what I'm doing.
Yo pa gen order jen yo konn rele l.
They don't know what to do with your money.
It's just that I don't know what to do with myself.
When people want to listen to the radio, they're going to have to plop plop.
My feet are plop plop.
Freek gen rele l
Ghon manch yo hold on to l
The swab is then taken to the pouch.
I'm going to tell you.
The person who has put a shortcut to what I'm doing, I'm going to beat.
Egzanpou konn pran on the late fian delyen
There are two tonnes of pills I can take.
Toukou an soap or fote loub yon gen delyen an lò fote
No soap for men, no soap for men, and no soap for men.
It's a good idea to use soap and soap.
They're making tea pop.
They're doing it for me.
tonk or di li
I've always wanted to do this.
Many people know how to make a phone call with a package or baray so that they can pay for it.
Li an yo rele sa.
I know how to put it in front of me in a way that makes me feel good.
I've been listening to a lot of people on the radio.
If you're not gay, you're not gay.
En pilè y ap pran radio yo anik mete yo sou yo pou yo yo sèchwi
Who is the card holder?
I was born into the radio business.
I went to the front door of the people in the room.
I'm going to tell you a story.
You'll never know.
There's no such thing as a great-grandfather.
Ask the person who made them choose you and you in front of the door.
They are wrapped in a blanch packet.
It's not like they're going to be able to handle it.
Men, they will say, will they be able to do one or the other?
Now, they're doing it, they're releasing it.
Or mannit need to put on the gen or, they relay.
Enbyen, they make their way to poultonn rad li.
I'm going back to the Bay Area.
They're in the middle of it.
They've won the championship.
I don't know what to do or what to do.
They can do their job quickly and easily.
And then there's the story behind it.
Finally, they gave me salt water and I washed them in a pool of clear water.
It's all about the men.
Make sure the water is clear.
It's as clear as soap and water.
Don't let me get in the way of you.
It's a great way to get involved.
How many children can I have with them that I will never see again?
I'm finally going to win it.
I'm going to take it again.
I'll take the water and make it clearer.
I know what I'm going to do.
I am the prince of the kingdom of heaven.
I'm going to take a look at it.
I'm going to ask the people who are on the radar.
That's what I'm going to do.
That's the only way you can do it.
Bon wouf now la
I wanted to put it in the sun or put it in the air for a little while.
Or take too much of it or put it in the wrong place.
I can't wait to get started.
This is how Salmon won't die.
Take a rad, for example.
Take it or leave it.
Get a new package or a new one.
I like to make phone calls.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about me.
That's how I'm going to put it.
I'm going to put it together.
It's not like I'm going to show up again.
It is a medium-sized phone.
I'll give you back what I've done.
I'm going to use rad lan.
I'm going to put you in a position where you're going to see me.
Or I'll put it on the right side.
That's the only way to get to know each other.
Who knows when I'll be back?
The virus is back.
Become a virgin or a virgin to the world.
I'm going to tell you why I can't do that.
Or you can either give it to me or give it back to me for a pack of rads.
I can't let go of it so I can't take it anymore.
Or they can put on a new mattress so I can do it for them.
This is the only way or the only way
I'm going to tell you a lot more.
I can't wait to get my hands on someone else.
It can be washed or sewn to take on itself or for something or to put on.
Or put on chabon ladani epi lefini or or so wap rad la la la
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
There's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
There are other non
To be or not to be.
I don't think there is any other way.
It's not just about making money.
It's all in your head.
I'm going to do it again.
Goose is a type of goose.
Something I used to wear in the rad la lafè rad lavin red kouvikèt
What do you want a child to do when they grow up?
wap rechanjerad sou li
We don't want anything like this to happen.
What are you going to do with the baby?
This is the man, this is the metrad child, this is the child, this is the man, this is the child all the time.
It is possible to generate radis or li li li.
Tonk Li is among the most popular people in the world.
You're one of the best people I've ever met.
You can't say or see who you are.
You're going to have to show up and see someone who doesn't do anything wrong.
I can't wait to see it.
You can't do what you want to do.
This is how the Okadi people do what they do in high school.
They don't make eye contact.
I'm looking forward to it.
adey anpò to to
They don't clean up the mess.
Or you can do it again
They don't make three letters.
Bon ouy men con order chan ou
I can't wait to get my hands on it.
I want you to know that I love you.
A man or a woman can't do anything because he knows what he's doing.
Take the example of 2 fi ki konn love
I'm in love with it.
It's like you can say or do something about it.
Or to go to the bathroom.
Or go to the bathroom.
I don't want to go to the bathroom.
Or not at all.
Or don't do the math.
What I'm doing right now is not too big a change of pace.
There are too many things to do for Mommy.
I'm not going to be able to sleep at night.
I don't know if it's true or not.
I don't know what to do.
I don't know what I'm going to do, but I know what I'm going to do.
They will know how to make a new sense of it.
or by mennaj
or pa dimine anjeka
or pa fokenn mennen ay ak a la
On the bed or on the side of the bed.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
Good things come to a close.
Right and left.
Facts of the world's poorest countries.
It doesn't matter.
on everything and everything in your life?
Is it salt, salt, or any other ingredient?
or pa wou
Or to make an exception to the rule.
or pa di kay
Kay no la
En mongon order you again
He's not a man, he's not a man.
M al okipe
I'm ready to go.
The thing is, I don't know anything about it.
A thing or two.
Things that I know I can do to make a living or win a living when you're on it.
Whether you're a fan or a winner.
One series depot two Gonj Series gen bestio yo
Bet yo trese yon bay you used to pass l mary
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it.
This is why there is a lot of blood.
Payizan pou pran an an lèt
Take it easy for yourself.
On the other hand, if you're a man, you're a man, or you have the right to be a man, you're a man.
It's not like you're going to have a baby.
Se yon gadinay m pa know
If you are a good gran Gon Seri men
How do you do it? is it even with beef la sa yo se?
It's a beast.
I've been waiting for you to tell me what you're up to.
One of the animals was standing in front of the door.
Yes, it's raining and it's raining and it's raining and it's raining and it's raining and it's raining and it's raining and it's raining and it's raining and it's raining and it's raining and it's raining and it's raining and it's raining and it's raining and it's raining and it's raining and it's raining and it's raining and it's raining and it's ra
We have to see why our people can be in one place.
I can't help but wonder.
I'm looking forward to the next one.
It's like a bag full of bags.
They are real.
It's okay if you do it or not.
Or we can all be a nonraje w appi bi gade ki sa
If you don't want to do this or that, you have to do this or that.
All you need to do is to look at your face.
I'm going to make a difference right now.
The genk kok karite
You can make a difference or you can make a difference.
Because it's in the form of a knot.
Because it's too cold.
It's a great way to get to know people.
or revetan difrens an
There's more to it than that.
I'm not sure who I am.
Let's assume that I'm going to be able to do it.
I can't wait to see it.
Gade on you
Look at the banners, and I'll be right behind you.
It's a great way to get to know others.
Look at me and I'll be there for you.
One of the poultry species is known to have been introduced here.
They've got a lot to do with your life.
They can live easily and easily.
It's too little too late.
Ap arela pa pran
So, if we can do this, throw them out, stand in the lagoon by the branches, what do we do?
Li fonzi, how are you?
They're rotten, they're black, they're not old, they're standing on the ground.
It's been a long time since I was born.
I'm going to tell you a story.
Or maybe I'll just leave it at that.
If you're looking for someone, you're looking for someone.
Look for the lagon of zeyaté in the men's pool.
There's only one thing left.
Look at the world around you.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
Eleven days later, he was sentenced to life imprisonment.
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to do it again, but I'm sure I'll be able to do it as soon as I can.
It's something that's been going on for a long time.
It's hard to believe that I'm going to be able to do this.
It's hard to believe that the people who know it are going to be the same.
There are many people in the Bay Area.
One of the main reasons for this is the fact that there are 11 new cases in the country.
They've just celebrated their men or bonj yo an konn repi sa
Li An or Li An
We've only just finished 11th.
They've just tried it.
Can you tell me what's going on?
Dapo, that's not what's going on, but yeah, is it 11 zegicho?
Gadonze k cho atè a, li cho!
I've only just given them two men, and I'm going to give them one!
It's the best way to do things.
You're going to be banned.
11 have just celebrated their birthdays.
It's not like they're cold.
You've got a lot to do with it.
You can hear it or you can hear it.
It's not a poultry.
It's a poultry and a pound.
or tooth lap sing sa epi
Or in the lap of e
The man who had to do it was the man who had to do it.
l ap code
But now I know what I'm singing.
It's all in your head.
I'm going to sing.
I can't wait to sing.
I'll sing you a song.
If you are a brother, you can do something about it.
It's almost as if you don't know what you're getting yourself into.
Don't even look at your head when it's too late.
I don't know how I'm going to do it.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
When you sing, you sing.
Men se pa chanteze not really need
The people who are covered by the beast are the ones who will make the best of it and the ones who will also sing the song.
I can't sing like my mother can't sing like my mother can't sing like my mother can't sing like my mother can't sing like my mother can't sing like my mother can't sing like my mother can't sing like my mother can't sing like my mother can't sing like my mother can't sing like my mother can't sing like my mother can't sing like my mother can't sing like my mother can't sing like my mother can't sing
Sing the song with your tongue.
Don't do it or sing it.
Sing a song like a moment
Such as the song "Kok Nou Kap Di Li Song"
Sing your tongue so you can sing your tongue so you can sing your tongue so you can sing your tongue so you can sing your tongue so you can sing your tongue so you can sing your tongue so you can sing your tongue so you can sing your tongue so you can sing your tongue so you can sing your tongue so you can sing your tongue so you can sing your tongue so you can sing your tongue so you can sing your tongue so you can sing your tongue so you can sing your tongue so you can sing your tongue so you can
If you want to know more about breakfast, I'm going to do it.
I'd like to know how to do it.
I've been waiting for you.
I can't wait to see it.
Don't worry, we're not going to be able to get out of the way.
Keep an eye out for it.
You're the only one who can do it.
I've heard how many times I've been able to get back on track.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm going to run it and I'm going to finish it.
I can't wait to see what I can do.
It's the kind of thing that's going to make you feel better.
Do what you want to do or do what you want to do.
I've been waiting for you.
I'm going to try to make a change.
I'm going to the kitchen.
I'm going to be able to see it.
I'm going to see you again.
I don't know what to do or what to do about it.
Or you can tell me what you're talking about.
I'm sure you'll be able to get back to me for the rest of your life.
I'm not going to say what I'm going to do about it.
How can I help you?
I can make it easy for you to walk away from me and get back to me.
I can't wait to see the baby.
I can't wait to see your baby.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to do that again.
I know how to use it to thank a gen in return.
It's so easy to get caught up in it.
I'm going to tell you how to fly.
I'm giving orders not to release men.
Gen good on things i know to retire before i can.
Men on top of things and tops.
It's important to know what's going on.
It's not a good idea.
There is no order to be relieved.
You can't do that.
Or please serve.
He knew that he would listen to the people who were there, and that he would be able to speak to the people who were there.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to take a taxi or if I'm going to be able to take a taxi.
I'm more than happy to be here.
If anything or anything is going to happen, it's going to happen.
Kourache li men have the ability to print to the bottom of the poultry.
It's a great way to end the rache plim poul.
If you're going to walk a new orache.
I'm going to do this orange flower.
As if I'm in a position where I won't be able to find it, I'm sorry to say that I'm not in a position where I'm going to be able to find it.
I'm not sure I know anything about this stuff.
I came out of the closet.
I'm going to run.
I don't want to hear it anymore.
I don't know.
Keep your head up.
It's a great way to get involved.
It is not possible to know the exact cause of Tiyak's disease.
They know that the disease is caused by a genetic mutation.
I know that there is no cure for the disease.
If you have any illness or illness, you may not be able to do so.
How many times have I heard of it?
There is no cure for other diseases.
I'm not sure what else to do.
I'm just going to go back to the drawing board.
I'm going to have a good time.
Bon baray by example or drink too much water or confectionery.
I don't know what to do or what not to do.
The good news is that there is no cure for this disease and there is no cure for it.
There is no such thing as a free party.
Ris pou ou konn gen rejectionman
I can't win if I can't win.
I could have won.
We're going to have to make a decision.
By expansion or fine drinking water.
or gen dwa rale sa a par eksanp
It's either new or new.
Pou gen or pranpe
I don't know what I'm going to do next.
Anma pa pa bòli lade a a a a anma pa pa bòli li lade a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a
I'm going to give you a break.
You're going to have a kidney disease.
I'm going to leave you alone.
There's no other generation again.
Well, I won't be able to do it again.
How did you get there?
How do you feel about being able to do that?
I'm not going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you
It's the bottom of the list.
Jan gane poul la bi toomi
Gen le lafyè gene w
Poul la ap toomi
I'm going to try to find a way to make it work.
It's either sour or sour.
Or you can look at how much poul la gagou
It is possible to train on a network.
Sab gen gen tyank
That's why we're releasing it.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do next.
non konn ap to use a
They're not so good at it.
They're just like that.
How good is that?
They're not the same person.
I'm going to continue with the story.
It can only be applied to diseases of the animal kingdom.
It's been a long time since I've been on a bike ride.
If you're sick or you know you're sick.
This is the genus of Seri.
It's not like we're going to be able to find a way out of here.
as beet volay
If you are sick, you know that there is a law.
The genome code is taken from the genome of all the animals in the genome.
I'm not going to give up on it.
I'm going to tell you what I can do about it.
Gen an ade yon koden nou yen vay an
You're not going to be able to do that again.
If you want to learn a language, you can learn a language that you can master.
It's the only way I'm going to be able to make it as a man.
Look, I've got a bunch of new things coming up right now.
Well, yeah, there it is again.
The people of Canaan and the Canaanites are sick and have no men.
Men who have been ill for a long time have been affected by this disease.
There are many different kinds of illnesses.
Pwon 11 or kaseze a
There is a gen 2 part
Good first party with Jan w rele i?
Or is it a good party and not a good party?
It's time to move on.
The other patya yon anyon an jwodèl
It's a very special day here.
It's not like I'm going to put a lot of money into it or anything.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
I'm not sure if this is true.
You can't or won't.
It's not a bad thing.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
What you can do is to make sure that you're doing the right thing.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again, but I'm sure I'm going to be able to do it again.
Throw away the things that are not in your hands.
I'm going to retire.
I'm going to retire zeblan an
Ap pran choun nou
An an se zeblan w can say.
Joun di a joun di a joun di a joun di a joun di a joun di a joun di a joun di a joun di a joun di a joun di a joun di a joun di a joun di a joun di a joun di a joun di a joun di a joun di a joun di a joun di a
If you're on your own, then you're on your own.
sa or retire
I bleached a
I don't know what I can do about it.
I'm not sure what I can do to get away with it.
You don't know what you don't know.
I'm going to take it or I'm going to explain something to you.
Something to live for.
What I can do is live.
Or to live in a new world.
For example, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a
And I don't know how to make a living off it.
Inmen know nan konsan jizan
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to do that.
Drinking only for a long time.
I'm going to tell you a story.
It's not like that anymore.
I can do this for you.
There are two ways to do this.
They are your children.
I'm sure you've heard of it.
It's not that I'm not a man, it's that I'm not a man, it's that I'm not a man.
Se se jenm
Wi men or benjan di se s ap gen include li
If you're on the verge of a divorce or you're not, say, say, say.
I'm going to eat your food.
I'm going to be white.
Li anmen ren se sa tou w w man of the people 11 blood m
I'm not sure what I'm going to say.
The same tactic can be used to hold or weigh as a percentage of the material with elasticity.
There's a lot to be said about cooking.
ki jan w ap dire release as a.
Men, wash the brownies, they're on brownies no.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
and benzene powder.
If you don't want to win a prize, I'll try to win a prize.
I'm going to go to the bathroom.
That's why I don't know what to do.
I'm going to tell you about it.
Or maybe another one of them, but they're not in it.
Or we are men if I don't or you don't.
Or put or take another if you want to put them in a ball.
Do you think you're going to be able to do it again?
or sea li
Or an engineer.
It's either that or it's what you do.
Or don't wear anything that looks like it.
I'm not thinking about it.
I don't think you're going to be able to keep up with the pace of things.
If you don't want to go on a diet, you're going to have to go on a diet.
Don't think about it.
I don't think there is any doubt about your business.
I'm on my way to work.
Or believe in those who know how to use Si or not only Ladab
If and only if you put it together.
It's about 10 a.m. if you're only wearing it.
Well, I don't know if I'm going to put up with it or not, or I'm going crazy, or I'm going crazy, or I'm going crazy, or I'm going crazy, or I'm going to put up with it.
Aske wi sou will genze or understand
Enpil leve primmi
Enmi, what's the matter with you?
Or do you want to be able to do that?
How can I help you, and why can't I help you?
Do you want your children to know about you?
Is there anything I can do about it?
Can you tell me what it is?
Why would you kill your children for me?
No, because I'm a child of the past, why can't I go for a week?
We're not supposed to be here.
I'm going to give you a second chance.
They're going through a lot of trouble.
He knows how to take care of his children.
It's your turn or something.
They're going to kill you or you're going to kill them.
They don't want to be punished.
The mechanism is to report or be able to guide the child.
I want to say the word.
Or will I be the one to get rid of it?
I'm on the phone with you.
Or they've got a good thing going on.
There will be someone to go out to meet with another person to go out.
I'm going to do it myself or I'm going to do it myself or I'm going to do it myself or I'm going to do it myself or I'm going to do it myself or I'm going to do it myself or I'm going to do it myself or I'm going to do it myself or I'm going to do it myself or I'm going to do it myself or I'm going to do it myself or I'm going to do it myself or I'm going to do it myself.
I'm going to do this or I'm going to do this.
Or taking children or putting them before men.
I'm going to have to do something about it, or I'm going to have to do something about it, or I'm going to have to do something about it, or I'm going to have to do something about it, or I'm going to have to do something about it, or I'm going to have to do something about it, or I'm going to have to do something about it, or I'm going to have to do something about it, or I'm going to have to do something about it, or I'm going to have to do something
I don't know how to use it on a regular basis.
Or moral or pass, or prans or moral or pass no or kite yo bat re.
Or put on other dandi men men men men or stand
Deploy or do two or more of the work to be done before it can be completed.
If I'm going to do the right thing, I'm going to do the right thing, I'm going to do the right thing, I'm going to do the right thing, I'm going to do the right thing, I'm going to do the right thing, I'm going to do the right thing, I'm going to do the right thing, I'm going to do the right thing, I'm going to do the right thing, I'm going to do the right thing, I'm going to do the right thing.
If there is no order, there is no order.
Orders to be given or ordered to be given.
In order to generate an order, Jan an pò or di
Well, if I can do it, I'll send them down to the bottom of the stairs to get to the bottom of the stairs, so I can do it.
There is only water I love.
Everything that I've been doing for so long has gone wrong.
The men were killed.
Let's get to the top of the tap.
They're going to eat it again.
Do you have a child, or do you have a child, or do you have a child, or do you have a child, or do you have a child, or do you have a child, or do you have a child, or do you have a child, or do you have a child, or do you have a child, or do you have a child, or do you have a child, or do you have a child, or do you have a child, or do you have a child, or do you have a child, or do you have a child, or do you have a child, or
They're even on the canal, on the beach, and on the beach!
For the sake of clarity and clarity, I'd like to add a little bit of water.
There is a lot more to it than that.
They are similar in appearance if they are pale.
They look similar to a dog.
Even if it is not enough to live in the water.
It's up to the people who make the most of today and I'm here for you.
I've got a lot of things going on.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again.
It's time to release it.
It's hard for me to let go of the bad stuff.
Or they will know not li
They don't know men.
Or they know men.
The production of a month's worth of food is so important that it is possible to produce other kinds of food.
or re-release.
Bon sa deyafèt
You're a good person to know, or you're a good person to look after.
It's a bit of a pain in the ass.
Good animal men have long ears.
What do you want me to do?
It's not like I'm going to be able to cook a rat.
I don't know where they are right now.
I'm sure you'll be able to use it if you're a pro.
I'm going to continue with Ogistav about the same thing.
In the morning, you'll either be monseying or coming in again or being monseying.
Well, if you're an animal that eats for me, what's the end result of an animal that looks like a rat?
Se, the beast is going to scream, the beast is going to scream, OK, are you going to have another nou?
You're the one who's going to make the most of it.
It's the first time I've seen it in two weeks.
I'm not sure what kind of animal it is.
It's a bit like that.
Envin, run and run or hold, and pentaz.
Okay, well, if you can't have children, what's the problem?
This is how you can re-release it.
I'm on my way to something new.
Believe that the animal will not be able to bear children.
I answered L..
So, I can't reach my soul, only if I'm like them, we don't talk about it.
It's not like I'm going to win.
Mousye pa win
They're going to win.
I'm not going to win.
I don't know.
I'm going to keep them up.
Or they can't live without it.
They can't live without it.
I'm going to pass.
Or at least one of them.
If you don't know, you'll never know.
I can't wait to get to know you.
So I don't know.
It's a good thing you've been there before.
I'm going to put my bag in the bag.
One vote is so big it doesn't matter.
I've seen it for a while now.
I'm not sure if I'll ever have a baby.
Pray that I may have children and that I may have children in the morning.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm with the coaches.
I want to be a coach.
I know who the wise men are.
Se yon don ekstab an people dap ba a
There are two types of people who don't know what they're talking about.
I'm willing to serve one person and one person and one person who doesn't have enough food when someone arrives.
On the other hand, there is a lot more to it than that.
They win, they win, they win.
Okay, lazin', they're poor, but I'm going to do something serious about it.
If you ride to the bay and get back to the island, Choublak's compound differs accordingly.
It's not that bad.
There's no such thing as new.
It's as if there's something wrong with you that you don't know how to handle.
And until they were sent, they were not able to bear children of men.
Li gen renkite won't be able to keep up with the demand.
I'm going to win.
Until the end of the war, the last days of the war were over.
They're probably doing the same thing.
They made it easy for me to make them feel better.
Li pa fè anmi non men
One of the men is so tall.
Make them lighter and lighter.
I'm going to raise the man who can't.
Yo yon bon jan yo can live.
I'm going to tell you a story.
I'm going to do a lot of stuff.
They're not going to be able to do anything about it.
Someone who sells an account.
I have two ponchòf la
You're going to have a ponchòf.
It's called ponchòf.
Ponchòf and fil fè y ap
It's the only thing I can do.
in the graph of m
De grafonyen or se chak ti grafonyen or m pou
or dwe gon order jen or pa di sa l.
I don't know what I'm going to do.
A pill to make a.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I can give you a big order.
I don't know what to do with my pills.
I don't know what to do about it.
They're going to have to do it with a men's combo.
I'm still with you.
I'm doing great on the weekends.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'll tell you what I'm going to do next.
It's about men.
I'm going to do something about it.
I'm going to try to solve this problem.
Or to gain a sense of urgency.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
It's a matter of getting something or something out of it, and it's a matter of getting something out of it.
Now you've got to fight.
Now we have the globe.
win or lose.
The men were seated during the wine tasting.
There are many things in the world that are colorful, and there are many things in the world that are not colorful.
Now that we've got a week to go, we've got a week to go.
There are no other people who can afford it.
I've been thinking about it.
I can't wait to see it.
It's a great way to get to know each other.
You'll also be able to set up an account.
With an account syan tout matyè
If you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man, you are a man,
If the grain is soaked in water, the water will be soaked in water.
The water flows through the new sky.
It's like drinking water.
I don't know everything about it.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
They're going to make it up to you.
They make water.
It's not the same as water.
Did they make matte?
Oukadi Matthew is the same.
It's just a matter of time before I do.
I'm going to put a button on it and I'm going to put a button on it and I'm going to put a button on it and I'm going to put a button on it and I'm going to put a button on it and I'm going to put a button on it and I'm going to put a button on it and I'm going to put a button on it and I'm going to put a button on it and I'm going to put a button on it and I'm going to put a button on it and I'm going to
There is no other way to do this.
You have a blessing in mind.
And when they learn to plead, they open their mouths.
The men and women in the league have not been able to call Vi phon big maling, mh, m, OK, what's your carpet again?
They have been diagnosed with cancer.
One of the main reasons for this is that it is not necessary to carry the luggage and the luggage.
Kisyanm is suffering from cancer.
I don't know.
Gen dran li gen dwa dou lò di chan anpò
I'm going to die.
I don't know if there's anything I'd like to know now that someone or someone would take such a big thing.
I'm going to tell you how to play this game.
with a large bowl of la
The lady and li bay gen dot nou ankon sou man of things leve la
There are two ways to live and work.
I'm not a Finnish man.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
You can do everything you want to do.
Or to say that they don't have time to use it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it.
I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results.
The button is attached to the button.
I'm going to call you back.
It's not like you're the only one who's worried.
I'm sure you'll be pleased with it.
I'm going to tell you about it.
Ap Seya
I'm sure you'll be able to find the right one.
A couple of months or so later, I'll be back.
I don't know if I can do it.
I've heard a lot about releases.
It's good to know that you're not alone.
Pete is Maling's father.
It's not easy.
I'm very happy with it.
I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results.
The things I take away from you hit me so hard.
I know what it's like.
I know that you're going to get a lot of attention.
I don't know what to say.
I'm a big fan of someone who knows how to win.
It's the only thing that's going to make you feel better.
Put your left or right under your bra as a large check.
I'm going to have to make a decision and make a decision.
They've got a network.
I've been waiting for you.
They're either big or small.
I'm here to help you.
They don't do it again.
You are a serious person.
I know how to live.
It's a great way to get people to be grateful.
I am grateful to the people who have helped me.
It's good to know that you'll be able to redeem your tank.
The people who have moved to San K ap gratè l
Yes, I'm a human being, for example.
It's the first time I've seen it.
I'm not going to lie, I'm not going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to
That's the only way I'm going to get back on track.
I'm not going to lie to you.
I ordered them to never speak to me again.
Parik zanpou passes through here on the road.
This is the only way to get to the end of the road.
A generation of people who know him.
The doctor is ill and so is the patient.
I'm going to take a look at the men's chouk.
I'm going to hit the ground running.
The definition of men is that they are up to date.
I'm going to tell you a story.
That's what I'm doing.
I've seen the whole globe now.
Don't be afraid to hit the ground running and fall down the hill.
I can't hit a hit with it.
It's a very bad idea.
I'll tell you what to do or what not to do.
I'm going to hit this place again.
En for something from the bottom of the sea.
Donfren ap inepi sa an kaye
Don't worry about it.
It's an old story.
on who is going to do it.
They're appearing.
And I don't know if you're going to win one.
They can make me look at the bay and there it is.
I'm going to win the race.
They've got a story.
It's been a long time coming, and it's been a long time coming, and it's been a long time coming, and it's been a long time coming, and it's been a long time coming, and it's been a long time coming, and it's been a long time coming, and it's been a long time coming, and it's been a long time coming, and it's been a long time coming, and it's been a long time coming, and it's been a long time coming, and it's been a long
The gene is gene-specific.
For example, if you want to run, or if you want to run.
I have a new record of my illness and I will take the gene for my illness.
They are suffering from the disease of chaufret.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to keep up with what's going on.
It's not like I'm going to lose weight.
Li kiyan yo di li
What's wrong with them?
You don't need to import or import another gene again.
It's the only thing I've ever done.
There is no man and there is no woman.
I'm not going to lie to you.
There's no other way to do it again.
Somebody's going to camp and I'm going to go to your place.
Or take a look at what I've been up to.
They're either li or li.
One of them is a man.
Someone who doesn't know how to make a dent.
I've been thinking about it for a year or so.
Or give it to me.
I know I'm going to be alone.
Li Salok men during his time in Odé and we are rope to the pad
A man who feels good about himself.
order jwon to come again
I don't feel like it.
Li santi makawon
Bagen ordered jwon again
They feel a lot of pain.
They feel like big animals.
Li santi jwon.
One of the things I know is whether or not to say yes.
gou santi bouk kabwit
If you want to be a part of it, you're going to want to be a part of it.
An animal is dead.
I'm going to tell you what to do.
Get up and take a break.
For a drink or a drink, a package of items is also included.
Jón Basòv did the drwa plen la
Drwa plen mikob
There's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
Drwa plen m ap malpokyote.
I'd like to know if you're going to be able to do a series of things that I'd like to do in the future.
I can't wait to see you all again.
It's been a long time since I've been up here.
You've got to know where you're going.
How do you pray for it?
Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes,
Eben, I'm full of training, I'm going to call you again?
I'm full, I'm full of cats, I'm full of spies, I'm full of bugs.
Do you know what I'm talking about?
I was so full of friends that I couldn't bear it.
I know what I'm doing and I'm guided by what I'm doing.
I am with a student or la
with the knowledge of the lotus anvò
with him or her.
You can't get sick from sick men.
I've always wanted to do everything for a man.
There are people who don't like it.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do now.
How did you get there?
As long as it's not your fault, it's yours.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that in the morning.
It's not just the people who live in the country who are being bullied, but the people who live in the country who are being bullied.
I've got a whole bunch of jelly in my lap and I'm still doing it.
I'm not sure what to say.
I'm not sure what else to do.
There are many ways to do this.
I don't know what to do with myself.
On the other hand, there is no such thing as a free lunch.
I'm not going to be able to pass on my illness until I get back to it.
I know gress or take li when I know, I know the person's face, I know the promad.
Well, people who know how to treat or get sick when they go to the hospital go to bed, or go to bed.
Okay, so they're raising the bottle and they're going to cook for you?
They're in the hospital and they're in the hospital.
We are a family.
We've got another one down there.
That's how I got here.
They're on the other side of the fence.
If you want to or not want to.
I'm in the middle of it.
I don't want to see you again.
I don't know what to do.
Gen doot nou anpo nou
Good and bad remedies are available.
I'm going to put them in a bottle or something.
It's the same as a redhead.
It is known only from the genus Sa.
There's no other generation again.
on order again.
A bottle is a bottle.
Diprè and wopye any piece of leather.
The good ones are those who know that there is an example of a person in this area who knows that there is a face to face and a face to reckon with.
It's the first time I've seen this woman.
This is the only way to say goodbye.
It's the person who puts a bottle in it.
What am I supposed to do?
Well, I know how to do it.
I don't know how to drive a truck.
Men can take advantage of the situation.
They put it all together, and it's all good.
I can't wait to see it.
I don't know if I want to know who you are or who you are.
I don't know.
I don't know if I'm a big man or not.
It's not like I don't want to change my mind.
Se sa only yoob
Yo pa as in orderjan m
M pa pass l as in orderjan
I'm not as good as I'm supposed to be.
Medication for people who are overweight or obese.
I've always wanted to make a bottle of water.
Do I have to take medication to compose a mouthpiece that I can take or a trap that I can drink?
m, or tranpe la freshi, bagen order yo an rele lan kò, tranpe tizan m..
You're going to get the flu or the flu.
I'm going to do two things.
I'm going to put on my shoes and I'm going to put on my shoes.
I'm going to be a bouyon.
I'm going to give you seven doses to make sure you're happy.
M doses are recommended for men.
This is a remarkable achievement.
What's the matter with me?
I'm going to take a shower and I'm going to take a shower.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to pull it off.
Men have been treated with remedy.
I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you and I believe in you.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything about it.
Take it or leave it.
No one is allowed to drink or drink.
Koupral put on the fire.
I'm going to have a drink.
This is a remedy for drinking.
There is no cure for this disease.
I'm finished.
Whether it's good or bad.
In the room to drink, drink, drink, bay or do so take the remedy.
There's a lot more to it than that.
Basyon is the same as the others.
It's all about you.
Or you can tell me.
I'm going to take a dose of it and I'm going to take a dose of it.
I'm going to meet you.
I'm going to take Metin and tell you what's going on.
They are designed to be a masquerade and they will not be able to use them.
A good example of this would be the end of a couche.
I took a pack of leaves.
That's why I'm here.
This is the case with the ballet.
Or prepare yourself to be a part of it.
The bay is not there yet.
I'm going to be here for a while.
We've got a lot to say.
Yo ap benyen nou is the la
We can't wait to see who they are.
I've been waiting for you guys.
Ki chande bay and ap bade la
What's up with that?
Se benin nouris
I'm not going to touch you.
Pa fwarye yo
benin chou yo
It's all about you.
I'm not going to be able to do it again.
Se benin chou yo ben
Benin chou yo redede
There's no way you're going to be able to get anything out of it.
I'm sure you'll be pleased.
Donke sa on ben
On ben cho y ap ba ba l va pe
We're going to be able to re-release it.
They can't get enough of it.
They're going to be fine.
The men or women who were involved in the attack were not allowed to leave the country.
Yo gen dwa rele rele l.
There is no man or woman who can support a man.
You're going to be challenged.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it myself, but I'm not going to be able to do it myself.
I've got everything and I've got it all figured out.
It's all about you and me.
I'm going to take it from you.
I don't know my father.
I'm on the bench.
Condye is the son of a man.
Who is going to take care of you?
There is a link to your luggage.
I'm going to tell you a little bit.
I'm not going to take it anymore.
There is a link between the luggage compartment and the baggage compartment.
The video includes a story about how they got there and how they got there.
I'm here because I'm not the only one who's been beaten to death.
The men and women who drank the wine were more likely to risk their lives.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
That's what I'm doing.
I'll tell you what to do about it.
You're going to kill people.
I drink wine because there is a chak man in my santou chak men, so I can make you cry and cry for help.
I'm going to do this for you.
It's not like I'm going to make a mistake.
I can't say that because there is no one I want to talk to.
It's not the same person who calls a.
This is what I'm talking about.
That's why I'm doing everything I can.
or well in the right direction.
as if I were giving or receiving or praying.
Take a few minutes to get back to where you came from.
Pa gen lòdi an yo rele sa
For example, if you have one at home or at home.
You've got a lot of homework to do.
A type of long-term care was born in such a way.
Monye may have just celebrated the same birthday.
Two or three times a day.
The baby is born.
I'm not sure if this is true, but yes.
I'm going to call you on the phone, but if it's my birthday, why are you still calling me?
I'm going back to my childhood.
We don't know what it is.
What do you want to do?
I don't know what you're talking about.
Land or di sa men yo gen right gen orderjan still
I'm going to release the bond.
Before you resign, you're going to be a man.
I'm going to start with a few words.
Because I'm not a human being.
Don't tell me that Bebe doesn't know anything about Bebe.
The baby is born with a few days left.
There are a few days left.
It's not like I'm ready to be a kid.
I started out as a kid.
It can be used for the celebration of the new year.
I've just had my birthday.
I wanted to be an anti-human, for example, to become a mother and a mother.
I'm so excited to be here.
I'm going to do what I want to do.
I'm sure you'll be able to find it.
I'm sure there's a lot more to it than that.
I'm a man who's just been born.
It's a good thing that I won't be disappointed.
It's the person on the screen that I was born with.
What's your name?
As a child, the mother is responsible for the child.
The mother put it in a bottle.
I want to be a mother.
I'm going to do it.
I'm going to do everything I can to help you.
It is possible for people to use the drug and poison it.
I'm in the mood for it.
I don't know who I'm going to meet.
They know their position.
How do you raise children when you're young?
The children are very knowledgeable.
How do you know if you're a kid?
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to see you again.
A child is a child who is in a state of confusion.
Do you raise the child in this way?
I mean, who are these, li bouvès an?
You don't know what you're talking about.
Don't let your children get away with it.
There are many ways to do this.
I'm going to do my best to help you.
There was nothing else before.
I don't know who I'm talking to, I don't know who I'm talking to, I don't know who I'm talking to, I don't know who I'm talking to, I don't know who I'm talking to, I don't know who I'm talking to, I don't know who I'm talking to, I don't know who I'm talking to.
Men up now tell things, I up now tell things.
Do I have a visa?
That's what I thought.
I know now that I know.
And then there's Anton Anm.
I know I'm going to be a big fan.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm not sure what to do with the people who know what they're talking about.
Going to the other side of the sea again?
M ap anse gen altr sea an
You're the only one who knows what to do.
I don't know what to say.
I know now.
The people are now out of business.
I'm sure you've got everything from the boot to the boot.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it to the beach or the mansion.
It's like everything is so new.
I don't know who you are.
I can't wait to get out of the closet.
Don't get too caught up in it.
You're not even on the same page.
It's not your fault that you're here.
I'll give you an example behind the cabrit la va lal
I know you and your mother.
I know you're a brilliant mother.
Or to marry tenmen bon
It's like a kite or kite.
Yes, it's the kind of person you can get.
Some of them have been very helpful to me.
I don't know if I'm a man who can't have a cup of coffee, but I can't have a cup of coffee.
One of them is a man.
People know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know, they know,
I didn't take anything for granted.
Now there's so much to say about the people who live there.
I can't wait to see what you're up to.
rejan moun sa a rejan moun sa a rejan moun sa a rejan moun sa a rejan moun sa a rejan moun sa a rejan moun sa a rejan moun
It's not a big deal.
I'm not thinking of you.
Make friends and new ones.
It's like a smile on your face.
Is it possible to know the answer to your question?
It's not about men.
It's not like you're going to be able to do anything about it.
I'm the father of the family.
This is no longer a taboo.
As in the genome.
You've got a lot of credit cards.
There is no one like you.
The people are one of the zanmove gen.
This is who I'm supposed to be.
The right to be forgotten is the right to be forgotten.
De gra gra adult
They're doing what I want them to do.
I don't want to say pop your bay.
For those who want to be a part of it, it's the people who want to be a part of it, the people who want to be a part of it, the people who want to be a part of it, the people who want to be a part of it, the people who want to be a part of it, the people who want to be a part of it, the people who want to be a part of it, the people who want to be a part of it, the people who want to be a part of it, the people who want to be a part of it.
I'm sure you're okay with that.
There is no one to blame for this.
One of the cards is a card.
There is no such thing as a bad person.
I'm looking for the wrong person.
It's a good thing you're doing well.
I can tell you what I'm talking about and what I'm talking about.
I want to do things that don't make much sense in order to keep my word.
I'm going to say the words.
I'm the boss and I can't do anything about it.
I don't know how to make a mess.
Men are looking for answers to their questions.
How long have you been here?
Men are not allowed to do so again, so they must be more moral than they should be.
Li men or sot donma la
They're looking for a way out.
You can take it with you.
That's why I did it.
You can't beat people and you can't beat them.
I don't want to take someone else's advice.
I don't know about you.
There is no such thing as a bad habit.
I don't know what to do anymore.
I'm not sure if it's a good idea.
There's no such thing as a free lunch again.
Now that you've got it, you've got it.
There are things I don't know I don't know how to take from this person.
I'm going to tap the link for you.
Jan yo rele l: yo li li fret
Therefore, when the person takes a meal, he can take it from the person who takes it.
They're going to get their money's worth.
People will know the end of it.
jan yo rele l.
Ele Whid Gwaz
That's why we're here to help.
It's not like I'm going to get a new one.
The men and women of the city.
I'm going to do it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
That's why I'm here.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
The people who listen to what I say are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the
Children all over the world are trying to make a mess of their lives.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to do it again.
This is the last time I've seen it.
A guy who's always been in my bed.
Or zanth bagal a an mouye
Now we have everything we need, and now we have everything we need.
It's not like you're going to have a good time.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
An order of one card and no order.
It's been a decade or so.
A person on a person from a distant distance who has lived in a remote place.
on a man from a long time ago, even an ancient man.
I'm going to take it easy.
The gene is derived from a.
I'll give you the wine.
I'm not going to make a mess of it again, ras yo gloup monse gran moun yo
You've got to be a great man.
I've got a lot more people than I do.
Ongason ki chamabdi l
The mission is complete!
If you don't know who I am, you don't know who I am!
Am I a great person?
Sil pa gran moun
I feel like I'm on my own.
I don't know anyone else.
I'm not a person for men.
I don't want to give up on my kids.
Or to pass through the w di a
The guy is either a really nice guy or he's a really nice guy.
A man or a man is a good-looking man.
It can be used by both men and women.
I have come to know that I am a good man.
It's a good thing you're trying to be a citizen of your country.
or bonm tout bonm
There are no men.
Alan mwen gen bunjan
Ris or pa really dineg ala
Or at the very least.
My grandfather's son is one of them.
Wakonde a la nou m gen man yon
I'm in love with you and I'm in love with you and I'm in love with you and I'm in love with you and I'm in love with you and I'm in love with you and I'm in love with you and I'm in love with you and I'm in love with you and I'm in love with you and I'm in love with you and I'm in love with you and I'm in love with you and I'm in love with you.
Or you men li of a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a
or bat tandi
I'm going to tell you a story.
I'm going to tell you a few things about men.
I'm going to tell you something.
I'm a guy or something.
Alakasyon I doubt everything is as good as it gets.
A man's actions, for example, lead him to marry.
But I don't want to spend money and I don't want to lose weight.
I don't know what to call this guy.
There's another generation of new ones again.
I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results.
Men are so lonely that they cannot survive.
I'm going to make a new one.
My grandfather was very busy.
Since then, there has been an increase in the number of people who have lost their jobs.
Or at least in the next decade.
It's a sequel.
They say yes.
Jason knows what's going on.
Bason is very new.
We're going to beat them.
Or in the countryside.
I can't wait to see what happens next.
For example:
It's more like you're on your way.
What do you think of the faces of these people?
The person who has the right to remain silent is the person who has the right to remain silent.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to do that.
They don't know what to do.
Or they know how to do more.
I've done a lot more than I've ever done before, and I've never known anyone who's ever been a parent.
I'm not worried about how much I'm going to worry about it.
A man with a child can never have a child.
It's not just me, it's not you, it's me, it's not you, it's me.
Well, the male genitalia aren't starting to grow, well, I'm starting to grow.
The person who has the right to a good deed meets a young man who has the right to a good deed.
One of them is young.
Gen right di ti jenn or gen right di ti jenn or gen right di ti jenn or gen right di ti jenn or gen right di di ti jenn or gen right di ti jenn or gen right di ti jenn or gen right di ti jenn or gen right di ti jenn or gen right di ti jenn or gen right di ti jenn or gen right di ti jenn or gen right di ti jenn or gen right di ti jenn or gen right di ti jenn or gen right di ti jenn or gen right di ti jenn or gen right di ti jenn
Or the right of a young man to a young man, and if I do not lose my dream of becoming a young man, I do not want to lose my dream of becoming a young man.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I'm going to tell you a story.
A young man with whom I have been having an affair.
I'm not a messenger.
I'm looking forward to meeting you.
Are you a member?
It's good or it's going to be good or it's going to be bad.
You're not going to meet one person.
In a nutshell, it's the same.
Bon ou frère papò or salye pou ou
I don't want to meet you anymore.
It's not like you're going to lose weight or lose weight.
Or sit down before you see it.
I'm going to tell you about your uncle and your grandfather.
on ti le
Or sit before you on the couch.
If you want to go to the expanse.
Others know the value of their own generations.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
What questions do you have to ask?
It's either one or two.
No one is too old.
They're too young to know who they are and how they're going to win.
They're not too old.
They're not too big.
I'm not sure if it's possible.
I've always wanted to do something like this.
So I don't know.
The answer to that question is simple.
It's all about what's going on.
Or maybe they're trying to sell it, but they're trying to sell it on their own.
So you're going to sell it.
Generations of people who know such a thing and such a thing are called to know what to do.
There are two types of people in the city.
A generation of people have fallen asleep in their beds and died.
Don't drive a car if you don't have it.
I don't know who's going to die.
I don't know what it is.
Before we know it.
The guy's in the middle of it all.
Or if someone is going to die.
I'm not going to die knowing God.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
The slaves of the dead are slaves of the dead.
Well, do you know anyone who has such a passion for talking about your life or doing your thing, what is your passion?
Did Lamid win this or not?
Once again, on bay ki kon sou koy anm.
If I want you to be white and know what you want, I want you to know what you want.
I'll give you a chance.
For example, you can use a mini-code to get to the top of the page.
I'm going to finish.
I'm going to tell you about it.
They died without a trace.
I'm going to tell you.
I'm going to do it.
The Alpank itself.
You're not going to be able to do it again.
The men of the alpink are quick to catch up.
They say to the poor, they say to the poor, but your soul gives them to the poor, what do you do?
They are not allowed to go to the same school as me.
It's only a curse that I know of anything else.
There is no such thing as a person who loves to be a grown-up.
It's an old-fashioned way to go!
And then there's the German version.
There is no such thing as a "matter thing".
You're going to have to come up with a solution.
publications of men and women.
There is no alternative route for stages or stages of fatigue or to the extent that it is possible to do so.
or repozi or
Whether it's walking or sitting or fatigue or standing or standing.
Or someone who asks or says something about it.
I'm about a quarter of a mile away.
I'm going to do this for you.
Let's talk about a tree or a tree or a tree or a tree or a tree.
When I get home, I'm going to put a set on my back and I'm going to put a set on my feet.
It's the only thing I can do.
I'm going to eat something new.
Two of my feet are well behind me and I'm on my way to my feet.
Behind the back of your head?
I'm trying to figure out why this is happening.
I'm not sure what they're going to do.
Now they're sitting in the basement.
I don't know what to do.
There is no fwonk li acoupi
A soul paved with a fwonk li acoupi pou
I'm going to tell you.
I'm not sure what they're talking about.
I don't want to sit here.
Now fwonk li rest now
If you're in a position to make a fwonk li A
I'm going to have to keep it that way for the next couple of days.
I wanted to tell you how to make a difference in people's lives.
I'm not going to lie to you.
If you know what I'm talking about.
Okay, to do this or that, and to wait, I'm going to be your man, my man.
I'm going to take care of you.
You can't go to the website and you can't do it or you can't do it.
Look at the mission of agriculture.
Sofè sou koulèv a la ou
Take a good night's sleep, for example.
One way or two
Or tell me what's going on.
I'm going to tell you something.
You've got a lot of men.
I was born.
I'm not going to lie.
My people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people, my people,
He's the only one I've ever heard of, sony.
There is no other way to do this.
I've always wanted to do something different.
I'm pretty sure I know what's going on here.
Or a package of things or something to do.
The app functions as soup.
It's not so much a soup, it's a soup.
There's no such thing as soup.
For example, do you have the right to use the fund?
I've been with someone who's been through a lot.
I'm not so close now.
In a cup or two of milk or two of anything else.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it through the next few days, but I'm not sure I'm going to be able to make it through the next few days.
Two definitions of w ap pa la with mwen
There is nothing in the sky or in the sky or in the sky or in the sky or in the sky.
m of fonditans
Se pa doutans or do
They protested a new arete in such a way that they could be seen in the church.
I'm not going to do anything wrong.
It's what I'm going to do.
I'm going to tell you something, but I'm going to tell you that if I do, I'm going to divide it into two phases.
Who is the chef who is a poucho or a poucho now?
Or something to do.
Or make a move.
I'm going to do another one.
Or let me know.
I'm going to do something about it.
I don't know.
I can't wait to get back to work.
I'm going to make sure that you're doing the right thing.
I've been waiting for you to come up with something new.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
This is the first time I've ever been hit by a car.
Or to make a change of scenery.
You've got to hit the ground running.
Or hit you with a stick.
It's not just men or women.
Edward is a man of many talents.
On the one who has the right to retreat or strike l
How many times or how many times do one of them?
One of them is a man's powder.
I'm not here right now.
I'm going to go back to the drawing board.
They're going to do a telethon.
I'm going to hit the ground running.
It's all good or bad.
If your teeth aren't good enough or you're going to die, you're going to die.
Whether it's cold or wet.
It's either a snack or a snack in the morning or a snack in the morning.
Don't give up on the morning of the first day of the week, and don't give up on the morning of the second day of the week.
I'm going to live my life to the fullest.
I'm going to hit the ground running.
Live to the fullest, or live to the fullest, or live to the fullest, or live to the fullest, or live to the fullest, or live to the fullest, or live to the fullest, or live to the fullest, or live to the fullest.
It's my soul.
This is my chance.
Or your chance.
Sa o gen
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
It's not that bad.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
Now you're playing billiards.
Now you're ready to take it.
Sixpann mit pye souchèz the?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
Okay, well, you're doing this or that, man, man, man.
I'm going to do the right thing or the wrong thing.
I've been doing this for a long time.
There are two people on tichan o.
I've been waiting for you.
Take me to the city and I'll be there for you.
These people, who don't want to do what they want to do to them, walk, walk, walk, walk.
I'm going to tell you, or I'm going to tell you, or I'm going to tell you, or I'm going to tell you, or I'm going to tell you, or I'm going to tell you, or I'm going to tell you, or I'm going to tell you, or I'm going to tell you, or I'm going to tell you, or I'm going to tell you, or I'm going to tell you, or I'm going to tell you, or I'm going to tell you, or
On the march too slow.
Men are able to live as if they were living as if they were alive.
Mache pi vit.
I'm going to tell you a story about a man who's going to die.
It's time to move on.
It's wise to go on living and really take an interest in men.
A lot of people are always on the lookout for it.
Men, or you can make them quick.
Do it yourself.
But today, you don't know if you can run or you can't run or you can't run or you can't run or you can't run.
There are many ways in which you can get rid of hair loss, hair loss, or to live a long life.
We've got a lot to do, but we've got a lot to do.
Degache w li vit If you or you or you wanted someone to make an animal out of the person you live in
I've been waiting for you to come here.
Who is Mizadō, who is he, who is he, or why?
It's not like you or anyone else.
Or you're going to have to pay for it.
Or you're too messy.
When the sun sets, or when the sun sets, or when the sun sets, or when the sun sets, or when the sun sets, or when the sun sets, or when the sun sets, or when the sun sets, or when the sun sets, or when the sun sets, or when the sun sets, or when the sun sets, or when the sun sets, or when the sun sets, or when the sun sets, or when the moon sets, or when the moon sets, or when the moon sets, or when the moon sets, or when the moon sets, or when the moon sets, or
Selu, or pitide salt leaf, salt leaf, ok.
I'm fine with that and I'm fine with that.
On a man, for example, he walks around all day doing nothing.
That's what I'm doing.
and carbon dioxide.
This is what I'm going to do.
I don't know how to do that.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
I'm going to make a decision.
I don't know anything about it.
I'm going to give you an order not to do it again.
You can't just sit back and tell me who's doing it.
It's convenient to say I'm a good guy.
I have a good feeling about it.
The good old days are here.
Socheson has a good flavor.
The region has a good flavor.
The men I'm going to use are men.
I'm going up and down the stairs.
I'm going to make a decision.
What can I do for you?
I'm going to be friends with you guys.
I'm the driver and I'm the driver.
Why do you want me to do this?
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
It's not like Katye didn't see it.
It's not the only person who's been there.
I can't wait to see them again.
I'm glad I'm here with you.
It's either too good or too bad.
It's not like I'm going to be able to keep up with the hype.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
That's why I'm here.
I know very little about them.
They are withdrawn for the first time.
They can be withdrawn for good, if they can be withdrawn for good.
I'm going to have to sit on the couch for a while.
I'm going to pass.
Or you can say
There is no order one or more can be ordered again
I can't help but wonder.
I'm in love with you.
It's important for people to know who they are.
It's not like it's a big deal.
Now I'm going to come.
The menis roamis la
And one of the three guys from Tanwèk.
Jeven sa yo souphre soup is a cold and hot drink.
You're not going to get it.
I'm going to run away.
It's like taking men who know what they're doing.
I'm going to take it with me.
I'll take your order again.
I'm from Africa.
I'm going to have to do it all over again.
Or you can tell me if I can or can't do it.
It's like the Earth.
I can't or won't do it.
There are many people out there who don't want to go to the bathroom or the bathroom.
They broke up and didn't come back.
They're not broken.
This is the first time I've taken rak.
The good news is that I'm not doing anything wrong.
They broke down into pieces.
We're not the only ones who know.
There they are again.
Let's take the example of a.
I just know everything.
They trapped me in a trap.
I know the problem.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it.
I'm going to give you a chance to talk about it.
I'm going to tell you about the character.
This is the last question.
I'm going to do it.
It's all about a.
They are trapped in the trap of doing the right thing.
I'm going to tell you about the epi.
I don't know if I'm going to make it through this period.
m on lè thus a a
I'm the boss and boss of nothing.
I'm going to do this for you.
They're just like that.
It's all about reading or reading.
Don't worry about it.
I've got the wine in the kitchen.
Men are born with Legs.
How can you tell if I'm a man?
I've heard it said in church.
I've been trying to find out what's going on with Loudo.
They're not really very good men.
It's been a long time since I've seen you.
I don't think I've ever had a cup of wine before.
If we are to be discouraged, we are to be discouraged.
Dev pa enteredise
They are often eaten on the beach.
You don't have to do your job.
I'm not going to lie about it.
I'm going to go down there and send you over to all of them.
It's not like we're going to be outside.
Can't afford to pay for it or pay for it.
Or redeem yourself.
Mwen, answer your question.
Well, look, I'm going to have to deal with two things, aren't I?
It's been a while since I've done a series of things that made me want to be a good friend again.
You're the only one left.
It's based on what they're eating.
resanble mat fini gen
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do anything about it, but I'm going to be able to do something about it, and I'm not going to be able to do anything about it, and I'm not going to be able to do anything about it.
There are 11 different types of swazo.
I don't know where I'm going with everything.
I'm going to have to pay for it, or I'm going to have to pay for it, or I'm going to have to pay for it, or I'm going to have to pay for it, or I'm going to have to pay for it, or I'm going to have to pay for it, or I'm going to have to pay for it, or I'm going to have to pay for it, or I'm going to have to pay for it, or I'm going to have to pay for it, or I'm going to have
One of them is Jan Woj.
You've got a lot to do with it.
With a few of them, they are under the influence of white blood cells.
There are also a few that are new to me.
From the back I reached the bottom of the column.
This is why we are here today.
whiske yon digan an tout
I'm not sure what happened to Sandovid.
His father was also a farmer.
They're still there now.
It's not easy to sing.
When men meet each other.
Rane made it to the top of the stairs.
There's a lot more to it than that.
I've heard it all before.
We know n..
You will be rewarded for this.
I will see you if you don't want to be together.
It is possible to look at the world through the eyes of a person and see the world through the eyes of a person.
men or here again
riyan sa a
The fridge is on the other side.
It's a good thing I'm not the only one who's been there.
It's the only thing I can do.
They were released in two versions.
The console releases.
They say it's an animal and it's freezing cold.
There is no such thing as an adult's wine in the world.
I don't know where I'm going.
I'm not convinced that there is anything wrong with me.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
When you don't even freeze the ice cream, you freeze the ice cream.
in the same good
It's not like I'm going to jump in.
It's the first time I've seen it.
The idea of what you're doing looks like a freezer.
I'm even going to use an ice-freezer.
They are larger than grain.
The colour of the skin is bren.
Enpi nou a.
Anba vant li
The colors are black and white.
There are 2 versions of the game.
The top of the defon head is in Gen 2 and the bottom is full and stands like a defoe's ear.
Now they know what you're talking about and what you're talking about.
You're going to be in a bay, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
You know what I'm talking about.
They're in a freeze-dried bowl.
Li gen yon ti sang ki party party well foy koukout
Jan n rele te ak anklou
It's not just an anchor.
not beet moulon kote
It's been a long time coming.
Since then, I've been the only person in the world who's ever lived.
It is also possible to re-create the sea.
They're also very close to each other.
The big bank has also released a number of new releases.
It's a great way to save savannas.
I will be there again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and
How do you know you're from Canada?
You've got your head in the blanket, right?
You can't cry, can't you just cry, can't you just cry?
Or do you think you're going to be able to keep your head down?
or tout men m.
There are two ways to do this.
I'm going to be able to do it.
Or do you know li
One of the animals is preske tounwa
There are a few types of baselines and an oketh sou.
It's easy to recognize because there are.
If they're going to be in front of you, they're going to be in front of you.
Li yon gen ti magri phone on your pwenn beck li
I don't know if it's easy to make a living in Haiti.
I don't know.
The common language is in the resanmanskren language, ta komens.
If you can do that, you can do that.
Le bon autre non
Yon an rele
It can also be used as an adjective.
I'm not sure what else I'm going to do.
They're going to be with someone else.
You know what I mean.
I can do that.
There is no such thing as a good man, and there is no such thing as a good man.
I don't know what to call it.
It's not like I'm going to die.
I'm going to prove it to you.
They're on the black side of things.
They're not there yet.
They're going to get it right or they're going to get it right.
It's a good thing we didn't use the powder.
It seems to have come from Solomon too.
Don't get me wrong, I'm not the only one who has the same problem.
As long as I'm not too old or a little bit too old, I'm not going to be able to do anything about it.
It's not like we're going to have a whole lot of other things going on.
Even if they can't do it all simply, they can't do it all by themselves.
People are getting the same information.
I'm not going to be able to do this without changing my mind.
There are two souls in the back of the body and two souls in the back of the body.
You're going to kill your son.
This makes them easier to answer because they are in the right place at the right time.
They look like they don't know what I look like.
It's good to know what you're getting yourself into.
They don't know how to read.
People with cancer also know how to get rid of it.
They're not going to be able to do it.
There's nothing to do with tigers and all the colors are so familiar.
They're at your school.
Is there a reason for this?
Or do you know
I don't know the reason for that.
I've been told that I'm going to have a short ride and I'm going to be able to ride my horse.
All or none of them.
I know how to call my horses.
Eske or konn tande pale do Manchwa z wakalanderik
Mankwonn bouki and anlis are on their way.
There is also a mania for the elderly.
My teeth are white.
I can't wait to get back to my family.
I'm sure you've won one.
There are many ways to do this.
De pa san.
One of the animals is also white, and the other is black.
The color is a grit color for Soviet tea.
They love to sit on the sidelines.
Such as bef wa al bourik
You're the only one who can't find the net.
They'll even be able to get their hands on it.
I can do that.
Everything I can do to make you feel better.
I'm not going to say goodbye to you, but I'm going to say goodbye to you.
Toftalè or swan pi or goon another or dim, if you can, but I can in men.
Okay, what can I say now, okay, lady, well, believe me.
What is the new ending with the bay of the sword?
I'm not going to lie to you.
I'm always working on other things.
Or you could say that.
Or dressed in a pale coat.
The lips are pale or look mout or
I'm on my way.
What you're going to do is to bring a gun.
I'm here to make sure they're good or bad.
It's either good or bad.
It's either on the ground or on the ground.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
Because there are too many of them.
The road is paved with good intentions.
They don't know what to do.
This is the end of the world.
I don't want to be in a relationship with men.
Nan Kayi's epiphany or after it is said to be the first of its kind.
They're not going to be able to keep up with what's going on.
There is no need for me to make an appeal or take a step back.
The people who live in Gipotou are the people who live in Gipotou.
There is no such thing as a gout.
Who's the boss?
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do next.
I've raised a lot of money for them.
I'm going to tell you a lot about it.
I've come to the conclusion that a woman can't do anything to help herself.
It's been ten years.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to provide a service.
It's not like I'm going to use it.
I'm in the mood for something.
Do you want to go back to a single place?
It's the only place I've ever been.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do next.
It's a story about a man and a woman.
I've been waiting for you.
Well, yes, if I'm from there, if I'm from there, I'm going to show up again.
And I think it's a good thing I've been able to do when I asked him to give me a break.
m ap is derived from
wap is derived from wap
There is no doubt that there is a reason for this, but I know that there is a reason for this.
I'm good as a.
Well, who's the boss, who's the boss, who's the boss, who's the boss, who's the boss, who's the boss, who's the boss?
I'm going back to who I am.
On the one tonwèl
They are on the other side of the fence.
It's the other way around.
Are you ready for this or that, huh?
Get down, I'm going to do this, I'm going to do this.
If I move forward, or, if I move forward, I do so, I'll be fine.
Annon, Ann, can you go back to Bonda?
Pa gen lòdichan yo ka di sa
I'm going to do your job for you.
You have the right to make your own decisions.
They can be rewarded with a prize.
In the midst of the challenge, I'm looking forward to the challenge.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I can't say for sure.
You're going to have to go back to the drawing board.
Thank you very much to the people who are here.
It's back to the drawing board.
It's going to come back to haunt me.
It's so easy to say that you're not going to be able to fill up an orive in front of a water bottle that you're going to be born with.
They're not going to be able to keep up with the demand for water.
I'm going to have to do this as soon as I can.
I'm going back to the drawing board.
Or at least you'll be able to get back to praise.
I want to go back to praise.
Or I'll tell you what I'm saying.
They're making a living.
If you don't buy it, you'll buy it with riyan or relay.
If you're going to buy something to eat, you're going to buy something.
I can tell you who I am.
Who knows what they're going to do.
Get a package that comes out of your mouth.
How do you know how to fix this problem?
It's the next generation.
The people are free to order and they know what they're doing.
It's not like someone's going to make a mistake.
It is possible to order a whole lot of things.
For example, if someone on the other side of the door is looking for me, then I'm not looking for them.
That's what I'm doing now.
That's what I'm doing now.
For those who don't have peace of mind, there's a good van.
What I'm doing right now is making me feel better.
Or even with a pass.
I need to be able to do it all right now.
I have something to say to you.
I'm going to tell you something.
What is the meaning of the word?
I've got an angel for you.
Or they can retete li monks for monks or men.
I can only say yes.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to get it or not, but I'm sure I'm going to be able to get it.
Or take a look at how it's done.
I don't know if I'm going to make another one.
I don't know what else I'm going to do.
Or do they understand?
The good news is that I'll be able to talk to you about it.
Say hello to the doctor.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
You can put it in a bottle or put it in water.
That's what I'm doing.
And now I'm a big fan of what I'm doing.
There's a lot to be gained when you're only on the podium.
The sound of my voice is very strong.
Gwonbou is dead.
I think I'm going to be fine.
It's not a good idea to make a big deal out of it.
Or they're going to get a rabbit hole.
Gende people on the exznanm vi gen right kwit on the mother moulen or take mother moulen with cellwil kwit li
Take it or leave it.
The right hand side of the door is the right hand side of the door.
on the mother moulen and cook.
Pat Li Pat Sou is going to take it.
They're not going to be able to keep up with the Joneses.
They're both tears.
as in Mai Moulè an eau
What kind of water?
A good person knows how good he is when he eats and eats.
One way is now and there's a lot more to it than that.
It is not a paritamine.
Now that's what I'm talking about.
Very good and very good.
It's good to know that you can't eat it.
It's a very good idea.
How do you do it?
Take it or leave it.
Or the right to take one's own life, or the right to take one's own life, or the right to take one's own life, or the right to take one's own life, or the right to take one's own life, or the right to take one's own life, or the right to take one's own life, or the right to take one's own life, or the right to take one's own life, or the right to take one's own life, or the right to take one's own life.
There are no men or women.
Or take it from behind.
Do it or throw it away.
We're going to do it now or later because we're here.
Don't worry about it now, it's not because of you.
It's time to move on to new things.
I'm going to try to find a new one.
I'm a businessman, and I'm a businessman, and I'm a businessman, and I'm a businessman, and I'm a businessman, and I'm a businessman, and I'm a businessman, and I'm a businessman, and I'm a businessman, and I'm a businessman, and I'm a businessman, and I'm a businessman, and I'm a businessman, and I'm a businessman, and I'm a businessman, and I'm a businessman
Drink with the batamou sou ben
It's a big win for me.
or rendered, for example
Or put it in a cup of coffee.
What's the big deal or what's the big deal?
Or are they coffee and rendue men, or are they li?
We're not going to say yes, we're not going to say no.
They're in the middle of nowhere.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it, but it's too good to be true.
It's been a long time coming.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it.
He opened his own branch.
You've got to find out what's going on, and what's going on, and what's going on, and what's going on, and what's going on, and what's going on, and what's going on, and what's going on, and what's going on, and what's going on, and what's going on, and what's going on, and what's going on, and what's going on, and what's going on, and what's going on, and what's going on, and
Or give a pen and a pen something to buy a new one.
It's either that or it's that.
A pencil or pencil.
There's nothing new.
I know now a series of viyann
I'm also very happy with it.
Do what you want to do.
I'm going to tell you a story.
I've got a lot of people on my side.
What have you ever eaten?
You've got a leg that's too heavy.
I was too poor, but I never knew I was too poor.
I've never been there before.
You've got a foot in the door.
You've got a cold feet.
They've got one leg.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
There's no such thing as a free lunch when you're young.
How young are you?
It's only a matter of time before it's over.
I don't know how to order fast.
or younger than li.
or young wine.
I'm going to tell you.
Or do it again.
Or just my phone.
I'm only a.k.a.
Or something we don't know yet.
Li genkou bonkou is the name of the game.
I'm going to tell you about the bonkers.
The men are looking forward to it.
If you don't buy a ticket, you'll have to pay for it.
I put them in a box of chocolates.
I'm going to do what I'm going to do.
You can't do that to me.
I know I'm going to lose weight, but I know I'm going to lose weight again.
Petriv m t app you are taken with the help of men.
I'm going to run out of water.
I'm sure I'll be able to get an order before the drill.
Or maybe I'm going to.
It's a great way to connect to the network.
It's either new or new.
Al-Fan al-Mann is the only one.
men al peze
I'm also looking forward to it.
Al peze, it's not cold.
It's not easy to buy or sell a house.
Pre-salt or rivo oil is placed on the water as a washing machine.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
If you're going to go to heaven, you're going to go to heaven.
I'm going to do it.
This is the first time that I've seen it.
Don't forget to buy or sell a ton of it.
I'm going to try to get my hands on it and I'm going to get my hands on it.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do next.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
Take it easy on yourself.
It's not a trap, it's a trap, it's a trap, it's a trap, it's a trap, it's a trap, it's a trap, it's a trap, it's a trap, it's not a trap, it's a trap, it's a trap, it's a trap, it's a trap, it's a trap, it's a trap, it's a trap, it's a trap, it's a trap, it's a trap, it's a
Get up from the trap and go to the bathroom.
Sit up and put on your seat.
Pouk wet li
I'm not sure what to do about it.
Just do the right thing.
It's called a lanmen.
It's not a trap.
Don't get caught up in the trap, don't get caught up in the trap.
It's not that I don't want to be trapped.
Kiswah is here again.
Kiswa w di anpò
There is no such thing as a kadis anenkò.
Or if you're a fan of what you're doing right now, you're going to have to do it with a bunch of bananas.
You can't make a big deal out of it.
They don't believe it yet.
It's the same person who's going to do the same thing.
On my bay I can eat with them when they're ready.
If men are willing to do the same thing, they will not be able to do it again.
O boukannen ni sant li gen dwa an bomb tout on the lè
Or I'll buy it for you.
One or two things to do or put in the la tandani
We're going to have to go back to the drawing board.
Fishing or shopping for a walk in the woods.
I've been waiting for you to come back.
I'm going to take a look at it now and I'm going to take a look at it now and I'm going to take a look at it now and I'm going to take a look at it now and I'm going to take a look at it now and I'm going to take a look at it now and I'm going to take a look at it now and I'm going to take a look at it now and I'm going to take a look at it now and I'm going to look at it now and I'm going to look at it
I've got a whole bunch of WI's.
What's the big deal?
to the genus Anansel.
If it's good or if it's too bad, then it's too bad.
There are two ways to do things.
It's the only thing you can do.
Am I going to tell you or am I going to do something?
One legim, one legim, one zakatay.
What is your zakatay?
It's all about zakatay lan.
Or even yop de chifou te or te rezi two, answit Sofè anpou Ekpò Wwè Bèwou an denyen anpou, nou kijon fè zakatay la.
Or if Zakatay won when?
How do you do it?
Or I'm going to do it.
Men or women have heard of you in Zakatay.
Men gwon order chan or karele li
If someone does or takes bayay la or takes li
or rachetizon yon met la tani.
Or it can be packed in a pile.
or fin nou pou pannen
Or retire for good.
I want to buy a new one soyon vit ladann
It's all about who you are and what you can do.
Or put some water in it.
Or put on the grass.
I've been to the new bay.
It is now available to the public.
You're going to win the race.
It's either red or black.
I don't know what else to do.
Yon kare le bay sa si a
You can't do that with a knife.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
That's the only way to do it.
It can be w ap flache l
A gen orderjan yo di again
Women are more likely to get pregnant.
I don't want to talk to you on the phone right now.
Now I have a couple of zombies so I miss them.
They're going to be there for me.
I'm going to do something about it.
Either a good thing or a video is good enough for the cabal and the rack.
As if I were going to be in the kitchen, I'd do it.
If you're going to take a leaf, you're going to see if you're going to put on a leaf.
They won't take you to make me drink wine in a bottle.
People now know the gate only.
I can't wait to get my hands on it.
I know what they're talking about.
I'm a long-time adult who knows how to make coffee.
I'm going to buy a brick for something I'm going to do.
What do you mean, brook sa y ap an?
I'm going to take a look at the two of them now, and I'm going to make sure they're there.
Now there's so much to win.
I'm not sure if it's possible or not, but I'm not sure if it's possible or not.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make wine from the past or cut it tomorrow.
They've been around for a long time and they know what they want to do and how to do it.
Well, Ben, do you know what I'm going to say?
Oh, or have you ever walked to a concert where you had a great meal, or bought a drink to make your meal?
What kind of celebration is it?
What's the big deal, what's the big deal?
Li wa, li wa an an others te routel.
An, two, li an an di, men, yo ka regis.
I'm going to make sure I'm okay.
It can be, for example, in the form of a package, or in the form of a package.
Pack something or put it on.
Whether it's your soul or your soul, that's all.
The things you want to do are good or bad.
Don't let these two or a few people get away with it right now.
Don't forget the people who gave me so much love.
It's your fault or you're wrong.
There's a lot of people in need of you right now.
There are also many devils to be cast out.
If I'm going to take you, I'm going to take you.
I'm going to tell you a story.
It's not like you're going to be able to do anything about it.
I'm ready for it.
m bay kabrit now l
Sa m rade bay kabrit is now a re
I'm really excited about it.
Well, listen, or you're sick, or you're sick, or you're sick, or you're sick, or you're sick, or you're sick, or you're sick, or you're sick, or you're sick, or you're sick, or you're sick, or you're sick, or you're sick, or you're sick, or you're sick, or you're sick, or you're sick, or you're sick, or you're sick, or you're sick, or you
It's a great thing to know that you won't be able to clutch and take your soul for granted.
I've been waiting for you to come back.
What can I do to help you?
You know what I mean.
I've learned that I'm not a vegetarian or a person.
It's a great day to celebrate, it's a great day to celebrate, it's a great day to celebrate, it's a great day to celebrate, it's a great day to celebrate, it's a great day to celebrate, it's a great day to celebrate, it's a great day to celebrate, it's a great day to celebrate, it's a great day to celebrate, it's a great day to celebrate, it's a great day to celebrate, it's a great day
The person on the screen is usually not taking a look at the screen.
The people in need are also like this.
There are two types of vegetables as mousè di a.
They are A.
There's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
There is a lot of excitement.
So much so that I can run on a leash.
I don't know what to call it.
I'm going to do the same thing.
I came from a very short time ago.
I can't wait to see what you're up to now.
It's a good ending.
People can come to the aid of people and people to take advantage of Now
Now a kwit Pa who order jwon kagil
I'm going to take a grand banann.
Or I'll just do it for you.
I'm going to retire with my soul.
Just do it.
We can't afford to buy chemicals that are too expensive to make.
It's not the net worth of the net worth.
I've been waiting for you.
I'm on the phone now.
Odiyans are not finished.
Logade a ou venn now a rin tounwa ki jan soda trive lamon epi epi
Or have the right to an order from now on.
Or the right genus of di.
It's like a firecracker.
men or pa genòd jan or ka dis anpò
Or I'll give you a glimpse of what I'm looking for.
A can now
They are now acran pranen
Or you're the only one who knows.
I don't know who's coming.
It's not like they don't know what they're doing.
I'm still good now
Empi logad be or pa wè manye sa soob di
It's the end of the world as we know it, and it's the end of the world as we know it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm not going to say it again.
They can't do that when they're in the middle of it.
If you're going to do it again, you're not going to do it again.
I know what you're doing and I know what you're doing.
For the sake of the child or the child.
Or just give me a hand for whoever's in charge.
w or ap di
I'm going to tell you.
If you're going to do something big that you don't know how to do, how do you do it?
Magi, Greeks, make another order, or if my son comes to buy a bottle, I'll buy a bottle.
I'm going to kill the cochon
It's a very important part of the recipe.
They can also be sold in white and black.
I don't know what I'm going to do with it.
It's not a grey syrup.
It's the only thing I've ever known.
There are many others in the area.
I know how to take or buy Lenperès fini
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything new.
They don't know anything about it.
Or believe that way.
For example, in the case of la y ap fon gri yo
You're going to get a lot of stuff that's going to fall on you.
After the end of the war.
It's good to have a good wine or drink, but it's good to have a good wine.
I'm blown away by the pain.
We're not going to let them down.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
Yes, it is possible to generate a mayimoulen
You will be rewarded with a one-on-one prize.
epi or do sa epi
or bal grès
I'll tell you what to do.
How to use your teeth.
Or I'll take it from there.
I'll take care of it if my son is sick.
I'm going to take a ton.
I'm a French fan or a dog fan, or a milk fan or a ton.
There's a lot of things in my family that I'm not a fan of.
It's time to take a look at what's going on.
I'm going to have to work hard to make sure that I'm not a bad person.
Bon labouri a
Hold on to the stick.
They're too much.
There are many things I've always wanted to do, and I've always wanted to do them.
I've always wanted to make a cake.
A wile sanm or other same granm li long
Or the same thing.
I know I've done a lot of things before.
I don't know how long I've been here.
You've got the same thing going for you.
Plant or make them grow.
They make you great.
It's a big deal and I don't know what it is.
For the things I know to take, I write letters for you to give you a letter, but not to me, but to others.
If there's something you can take a little bit of in the middle of it, there's a channel.
Alert, it's time to do something about it, but if you know what's going on, what's going on?
Alert, too one li.
Jan yo tou wou di la anpò.
We've got a lot of things going on.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
The cell population is also at a disadvantage.
If you're going to make me feel better, you're going to make me feel better.
or gen tri kalte bay
I'm going to give you a kiss.
If the sun does not set, the sun does not set.
Or with the placement of the person.
I'm going to do this and I'm going to do this and I'm going to do this and I'm going to do this and I'm going to do this and I'm going to do this and I'm going to do this and I'm going to do this and I'm going to do this and I'm going to do this and I'm going to do this and I'm going to do this and I'm going to do this and I'm going to do this and I'm going to do this and I'm going to do
They're going to take one won won plaque and now they're going to take one won plaque and then they're going to take one won plaque and then they're going to take one won plaque and then they're going to take one won plaque and then they're going to take one won plaque and then they're going to take one won plaque and then they're going to take one won plaque.
What do you think?
It's going to take a lot of time now.
Pran pral dekiye men
I'll see you soon when I get a visa.
There will be a council meeting.
The needs of the people involved will be met by the people involved.
I'm sure you'll be able to use it for your own purposes.
It may be that we are now at home or at home, or that we are now at home or at home.
I don't want to go home or do anything.
And I will say to those who are with me, Amen.
Bajanm tel thing
I don't know.
Now or never.
It's going to be good if it's early or late.
It's not like I'm here right now.
Or take something from your grandmother.
Lefin or pran epi epi
Take it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or something.
It's a good idea to go back to the drawing board, or to go back to the drawing board again.
They can also be made of rice together or with a saucepan or saucepan.
Se bay ti grenn long moun nou renman very much very much la
They've got a lot of men like that.
It's only Sunday that I'm going to hit the ground running.
Se grenn bay sa yo yo krit.
Do you know this?
I know from my lips, I know from my lips, I know from my lips, I know from my lips, I know from my lips, I know from my lips, I know from my lips, I know from my lips, I know from my lips, I know from my lips, I know from my lips, I know from my lips, I know from my lips, I know from my lips, I know from my lips, I know from my lips, I know from my lips, I know from my lips, I know from my lips, I know from my lips, I know from my lips,
Well, if you're going to be with me when I'm at work, won't you be able to do it, do it, do it, do it?
It's not because I've been fighting with two or two or a pallet or a pair of shoes or a pair of shoes or a pair of shoes or a pair of shoes or a pair of shoes or a pair of shoes or a pair of shoes or a pair of shoes or a pair of shoes or a pair of shoes or a pair of shoes or a pair of shoes or a pair of shoes or a pair of shoes or a pair of socks or a pair of socks or a pair of socks or a pair of socks or a pair of socks or a pair of socks.
I'm going to tell you.
In the name of the priests.
It's not like I'm going to be a new priest.
It's not like it's going to happen.
Take, for example, men's clothing.
Or do or do chak chak ee or do the other la la kouman yo te tone me after what is a
Don't be afraid to ask for help.
If you say or do something about it, you're going to have to answer a phone.
What's going on here?
Can you tell me where the other bags are?
This is why I'm here to help you.
Diwi Gerèsos Pwa Onm Onm Ayiv is an example.
Eight passes through the mansion.
It's the first time I've seen it.
Or break it down with me.
or kite or li li
Or rendwa pran ti grenn yo
It's not about what you're doing.
I've been told that I'm not going to be able to do it again.
Yon jan de Mai used to take li
Or do a job and do it in a way that makes you feel better.
On Labor, May and May, the men went to work in the mines.
I'm not going to say anything.
There are many ways to do this.
Many of us have heard of it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that, but I'm sure I'm going to be able to do that.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
Or if I'm happy to prove myself to you.
One believes that the question is the question of Mpral Pwezo
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything about it.
I know how to take May.
This is why they have to pass them through the mold, so that they can be refrenned to what they want.
Release too farin
They are happy and happy.
It's a lot of fun.
It's not the end of the world.
I'm going to call my husband and I'm going to call him again.
I don't think there are seven things I've ever done before.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it to the next level.
Or byon gen dwa kwit li blanch for me I met only one of them in se ki chon w re re l
Location of the bond mayi
And so only w rele li
I'm going to tell you about my brother.
It's a little bit like that.
I'm going to tell you what to do.
The baby will be ordered to re-release.
After the baby is born, the gen order chan ankomon
I know how to take a nap.
I know what I'm doing and I know what I'm doing.
I'm wearing a hat and I'm wearing white.
You know who I am.
Am I the only one, or do I know where?
Mayari is taking the l.
I met a cholyè on the other side.
I've made choins for you and I'll be there for you.
I took you to a monastery.
Gen releases sa.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa!
The same thing again
I know how to pronounce it.
That's why I'm not going to eat.
The gray is always grey.
It is often used to describe the genome of a plant.
I'm going to put it in there.
There's no other way I'm going to do it again.
Bon yo konn pran bay sa yo samplon which sample
That's the way you want it.
Empi yo prani
I can't put my finger on it, I can't put my finger on it.
I'm trying to figure out what to do with myself when I'm on the phone.
You are the only one who knows how to handle it.
I don't know what to do with myself.
We're going to take care of this.
If you're from Akasan, or believe that Akasan, you can also be from Akasan, men.
If you ask me, I'll give you an example.
Or maybe you're just trying to get a taste of what's in it.
That's why I'm here.
The canel is made of soft milk and is then re-roasted.
Or is there anything else I can do with it again?
On the things I know how to take.
I don't know how I'm going to do it.
I'm going to take it and put it on my face.
Antifil bannann nou yo bay thus
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
This is the only way to re-release li.
yo parile l.
May may also be used.
There's nothing new here anymore.
Or don't do anything new to him or her.
I don't know what to do about it.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I didn't know he was alive.
Well, if you're a good mother, but you can afford it even if you don't need it, how can you afford it?
Do you even need a bath?
No, you don't need to wash, they're full loaded, they're full loaded, they're full loaded, they're full loaded, they're full loaded, they're full loaded, they're full loaded, they're full loaded, they're full loaded, they're full loaded, they're full loaded, they're full loaded, they're full loaded, they're full loaded, they're full loaded, they're full loaded, they're full
Money or money is prohibited.
Or not wash li
I was released as an apostle.
I'm not sure I'm an apothecary.
Take it or leave it, I don't want to take it or leave it.
Or you may have to wait for the next one.
You may not be able to do it.
There is no such thing as an all-inclusive game.
You can't hear them.
They're coming.
It's better than other men's magazines.
with two tigers or k ap or ti grann such with men or among them.
For example, if you're going to pay a fee, you're going to pay a fee.
They're going to be full of grandma's bonuses.
men or for the sake of the greater part of them.
Oh, and a lovely lanman.
Li karit an bazongou so Genyen itself
Take a look at what you've been up to in your bathroom.
Or at least two of them.
It's not like I'm going to give up on men.
What's the matter with you?
It's not easy to say No.
Don't make a new man so much that you'll take your grenn yo so much.
or reported li.
It's as if they're going to die or they're going to die.
Or a bunch of envil babies
You have a grandmother who teaches me how to cook.
You can't do it or you can't do it.
I'm not sure if it's good or bad, but if it's good or bad, it's bad or bad.
May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or May or
On mayou ou wou le sò
On mayou ou wou le
You are grenn like grenn pitimi
I'm going back to my mother.
The mother of the people is angry.
It's very detailed here.
gen mayou or hold lou grennen l
A mother and a father can be friends.
It's a great way to get a feel for yourself.
A vat is not a pilon or pile li
A pilon or pile is a pilon or pile.
What can you do for me?
If you don't have a day in the world, if you don't have a day in the world, if you don't have a day in the world, if you don't have a day in the world, if you don't have a day in the world, if you don't have a day in the world, if you don't have a day in the world, if you don't have a day in the world, if you don't have a day in the world, if you don't have a day in the world.
I'm going to take care of my people.
Or respond to me full of doubts.
It's a good idea to take a bath or put it in a pilon.
I'm going to do it every day, and I'm going to do it every day.
Bon o pa congjou an karile I t'te l'things
What's going on again?
The soul is taken from the soul.
I'm going to take your breath away.
Or to pass things on in the form of a genome depending on your behaviour.
I'm going to sell it again.
You can't beat him.
Now I'm going to have a live show and I'm going to have a live show and I'm going to have a live show and I'm going to have a live show and I'm going to have a live show and I'm going to have a live show and I'm going to have a live show and I'm going to have a live show and I'm going to have a live show and I'm going to have a live show and I'm going to have a live show and I'm going to have a live show and I'm going to
I asked him to give me a pilon and tell me what to do with it.
He's not the only one to win.
For a long time, for a long time, for a long time, for a long time, for a long time, for a long time, for a long time, for a long time, for a long time, for a long time, for a long time, for a long time, for a long time, for a long time, for a long time.
It's time to take a different approach.
I want to be able to help you.
It's time to take a few steps.
Take a look at some of them.
Or graje li enfilè fin nou ou tode li
Enfi or take people's things.
Or put yourself in a different position, or do something else.
Wouldn't someone take a new test or take a new test?
I'll be fine with touching you.
Bon ou pa gen nou ou ta karele l again
If it's good or bad, I'll take it from you.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do anything new.
I'm not going to say anything else.
It's a good thing I've never done before.
I'm going to sell it again.
I can tell you a happy ending.
Something or put it on the head.
I'm going to put on a defense to put me on the line.
They're platinum, aren't they?
It's good, it's good, it's good that I'm going to take some French flour or something.
I know how to make you feel.
I've got to get back to where I'm from and get back to where I'm from again.
I'm going to let you go.
I'm going to call you back.
I'm going back to the drawing board.
There you go again, man, okay.
Don't do this or that or you won't be able to do it.
How do you know I'm coming back again?
On the things that I'm going to do.
I'm wondering if I'm going to be a mom or a dad.
Now or never.
Don't know if you're going to be able to do that.
Don't do anything new or don't know anything.
The men saw a number of rifles.
There are many things I can take.
I'm going to take it easy.
I'm going to take care of myself, and I'm going to tell you what to do with myself.
I want you to freeze the grass with an ice cream.
Do you know if there is another, if there is another, I don't know?
The things I used to know, I met him now.
What do you call it?
So that's how I'm going to re-release it.
How can I put it on now and only now can I put it on again?
Well, I know you put it in there now, as a politician, after you've done it, I can't put it in the epic.
I can't see the light at the end of the tunnel.
I know I'm going to get it right.
Is there anything that people can do to help you?
Is there a way to do this?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
If you're already there, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't
It's not like I don't know what I'm talking about, it's like I don't know what I'm talking about, it's like I don't know what I'm talking about, it's like I don't know what I'm talking about, it's like I don't know what I'm talking about, it's like I don't know what I'm talking about, it's like I don't know what I'm talking about, it's like I don't know what I'm
Do you know who he is?
Eben, w gen dwa, or so of men piste, answit or kadele yo.
No, I can't release it again.
The thing is, there's nothing wrong with that.
It's either that way or it's that way.
If you don't want to read the episode, you can.
The same thing happened on my grandmother's website again.
What is it?
The answer to this question is that even one person can answer the question.
They don't know how to be good.
I'd like to know if I'm going to be able to do it again.
Gen yon ebis dos
Men have a gift.
I can't wait to get back to you.
On the thing of exzanb or do e se or pran chou or pran kreson
For example, in the past, I've had a lot of problems.
Wap now to kri with Zaboka epi
On the other hand, there's a lot to be said about men's health.
Or release it.
It's time to move on to the next step.
Or two people who are e epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi epi
It's the only thing I know how to take.
The bus is in the middle of 2 routes.
I'm going to try to get a free ride.
I'll cut the moss and take the fries for you.
How do you get rid of it?
It's not like the moon.
I'm here with you and I'm here with you and I'm here with you.
It's time for us to go back to the drawing board and get back to the drawing board.
I'm going to talk to this guy right now.
So what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what, so what?
Is there a sweet potato now?
How many men are there, how many potatoes are there, how many potatoes are there, how many potatoes are there, how many potatoes are there, and how many potatoes are there?
Yes, but if it's not a potato, it's not a potato, it's a potato.
It's either good or bad.
It's not a potato.
I am now a potato peze or two sa w di man w ap now a
I'm now a banana peze yo konn pran
On ti bay se Sa yo wè la
I've had a lot of fun with it.
I know how to take it.
That's why I'm here.
I'm always on the lookout.
There are a lot of people out there who are very old.
That's why I'm going to do something about my uncle.
That's how salmon releases.
Do I believe that we are now?
Or do you know how to do it?
Or take a leaf.
or pran o gen dwayou
I don't know anything about it.
Or put it together.
We've already had some practice.
or set a tandan
or put bannann
Or put it on the couch.
Or put something just to do and re-release.
From January 1st.
My grandmother is very happy.
It's not easy for people to drink something that they're not comfortable with.
I'm going to release my soul.
It's a good thing people know how to do it.
You know how to buy a crab, but you don't know how to buy a crab.
Se wè sa only yo met ladan nou
Yes, I'm sure you've worked hard.
t include an yo rele bay sa a
You can't beat him.
You're the one who met me.
Or you can do the right thing.
Now that I've met you, I've met you.
You can't do too many things with a potato.
It's not illegal to do so.
France is happy with the way things are going.
That's why I put this thing together.
I've been waiting for you to come back.
Don't drink as much as you can.
I'm going to drink.
This is a good consonant.
For example, if you want to buy a good wine, you can buy a good wine.
Or make sure it's at least 11 degrees above sea level.
There's another bay card again.
It's not a big deal, it's a big deal, it's a big deal, it's a big deal, it's a big deal, it's a big deal, it's a big deal, it's a big deal, and it's going to happen again.
Today, for example, we're on our way.
Bon si yo to contwye beef in the march a
Lowe bought a few feet of beef.
You can either make a new wine or buy a new beef sauce.
You can put the fridge in the oven.
Put something in it to make it grow.
The consonant is a consonant.
Or let me make you feel bad about it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it to any of them.
I don't want to be here anymore.
If I were able to order a new room, I would be able to order a new room.
I don't know how I'm going to do it.
I'm going to have to wear a new shirt.
What are the symptoms of epilepsy?
You can buy a new one or buy a new one.
What's the other one?
Well, there are those who don't know how to take it, but they do.
Yo e face bay ladanmi or who took l
I'm going to put you in my shoes.
You'll have to wait a few hours and then you'll have the right to do it right now.
That's the only way I'm going to get back on track.
I know how to drink wine.
You've got to be a human being.
You take on a trip and you find me in the skies.
There is no such thing as a problem or a problem.
Gen on chante
I know how to make a gen on singing t well sa La ladan nou i cut kouloure faire
Now there's a whole bunch of packages.
I'm going to try to make it easy for you.
There are still other questions.
Well, whatever you do, if you take a cochon, you kill me.
I'm going to kill them and I'm going to take them.
Yes, I'm going to cut you down and cut you in a long, long tranch.
I've met a lot of things and I've been on a trip.
It's time to let go.
We know that nonni al achke de
It's all about me and what I'm doing.
They will not re-order Jan again
Or something else.
It's a lot of fun.
Your passion for jedi is to do other things too.
It's a good way to flourish and flourish.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it again.
There are four things I'm going to do, including what I'm going to do.
There are four of them.
I'm going to go with Men.
I'm not going to lie to you.
I'm going to take you out of here.
Why do you think you're doing this?
Or do you know what they are?
And who's going to do it?
Well, I know that.
You two are doing this, men, never forget it.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
Dan, how do you take this, for this is before the chicken pox, the chicken pox or you know what?
That's why I'm here.
And then there's the trit.
Because I know what you're doing and what you're taking.
Yo gen da pran threefold
I'm going to put it in four times and then three times again.
The men of one generation are coming to the rache too long.
Yo desanni yo an vwope li
I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results.
I'm going to cut it off.
I cut my fingers in half.
Well, there's another way, another way, another way, good, okay, who's going to be my dad, so I know I can distract myself.
Well, good thing, old Nontan you know how to do it, or don't be born so you know how to do it now.
I'm sure you've heard of Lou's name.
We're old enough to know better than that.
Everything is as old as I am in Eke
I'm going to tell you what to do next.
I'm going to sign here.
I can't wait to see what you do with it.
For the time being, the men and women are not ordered to return to their homes again.
It's a good series of bay le person yo make yo metan yo.
I'm the only one left.
It's been a long time since I've taken this one.
There is no such thing as a man's generation.
The other is the same.
I'm going to sell you something new.
Out at the top of the ladder.
The first time I met someone was in May.
There are a lot of people out there, and there are a lot of other people out there.
There are a lot of things that I know about selling on the Bwat a package of products to all the children of Zatangi
I'm going to tell you what's going on.
Sonnon an an yo pa gen lain non yo konn rele li
Gen lòt non tou yon fouye
This is because gen gen tout kalte
I know how to drive a boat.
I'm standing there like this.
I've always been a fan of the boat.
It's a great way to wash your face.
It's not the same thing.
It's not the same thing as that.
You're right, you're right.
In the case of Gen Sadin men gen yon chon fish cladann
Pwason an Yo yo dwo gen chon mon Gen Sadin
Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
The person you know is hungry or you are hungry or you are not hungry.
And if we don't even have a clue, they'll take you to the bathroom.
That's how I got back to it.
If you don't mind, I'm going to take you to the bathroom.
Yo rache yo pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa
It's like a tablet.
Karay children you know how to make a soup, men t nan bouch yo love to make a soup yo gen yo rele yo.
Ooh, gen mant la tou li.
No, yo gen mant tou li a tou men, yo know tout piti piti tout color, all color, demache.
They know everything about color.
The word for paper is Latin.
I've known for a long time that I've been able to sell it for a long time.
I know you're riding people who know you and you're riding men.
You've got a lot of money.
It's made with french fries.
You've got to be a man.
It's not a man's thing.
I know what you're talking about.
When they do things, it's almost as if they want to take the pocket.
I'll take them to make them white, and I'll take them a little bit, so I'll know the confit.
The generation of people who don't want to celebrate birthdays.
I don't want to buy any more yen for men, but I want to celebrate men's birthdays.
It's for people who need to celebrate the birthdays of men.
They're not going to be able to do it again.
If you want to buy a bottle, if you want to buy a bottle, you can buy a bottle.
And the people who say that the things that have been done in the past have done the right thing.
What's the big deal?
It's a great way to get to know each other.
Let's take this as an example.
What have I done to you?
For example, let's say I'm doing this.
I'm going to take things for granted.
I can't wait to see it.
Put on your mind the things of Madani
I've been waiting for you to say goodbye.
I'm not fully aware of what's going on here.
It is located in the district.
They've made it easy for me.
Bonsi, is there anything I can do to make it happen, or what?
Now, how can I take a man's hand, and how can I take a man's hand?
Go, go, go, OK, as long as I'm on TV and I've met so many of you, how are you doing?
So, what's going on?
OK, don't, if we can do this, what are we going to do, what are we going to do, what are we going to do?
They drink, no, they don't eat, they drink.
To give an example of a man's attitude toward everything and the things he does with it is to take it with him.
I'm going to take what I'm doing.
For example, when you're receiving an e-mail, you'll receive an e-mail.
This is why I'm here.
So much so, that you've got it all figured out.
Make them salty and I'll put some vinegar or bottle in front of them.
This is why they put on a bottle of pepper.
There are two layers of the mouthpiece.
Or I'm going to sit down.
I don't want to lose a lot of people because I don't want to lose a lot of people.
Do you think it's too late?
It's time to move on.
Sil pap as a human being.
Sil pap as m
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm going to try to make it easy for you.
I'm going to make a move or something.
I feel like I'm wearing a suit and tie.
You're going to have to do something about it.
I don't want to do anything to make you feel bad.
I'm not going to say now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now, or now,
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
No one is alone or alone.
I'm going to tell you if it's over or just over now.
Now, if you're going to make it to the end of the decade, you're going to make it to the end of the decade.
I'm going to tell you a good story.
Or feel or don't drink a little too much again.
I'm going to tell you what I'm feeling.
For example, if you pose a pose, you can use it.
I'm going to tell you about this guy.
Take, for example, the case of Chita Ra.
Full or partial.
It's the only thing I've ever done before.
The other guy.
I'm not going to lie or even I'm going to do something about it.
If you're looking for a guy and you're looking for him, he's going to take you.
They took the cola.
They're coming or going.
You can't drink until you've had such a good time.
I am prohibited from drinking.
If you drink from me, I will give you an order.
Whether it's good or bad.
If he or she wants to go to the bathroom.
If it's new or we're not going to buy it, then we're not going to buy it.
In the meantime, there's nothing wrong with me.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm going to ban you.
I don't want to tell anyone or anything, or even just anyone.
I'm on the receiving end of it.
If you don't know
I don't want to hear or hear anything about it.
If you're a man, you've got nothing to lose.
I don't want to do it again, I don't want to do it again, I don't want to do it again.
mikou e gen dwe order jan an
I've been to Paris for my birthday.
You are the voice of Paris.
I'm going to tell you what to do.
Take something for yourself.
You can take anything you want.
Or take anything to put in water or water under too much pressure to make it hard to drink.
o o o to.
On the other hand, you've got a lot to do with it.
It's not like I'm going to make a whole lot of mistakes.
It's not like we're going to make a whole lot of milk.
or vice versa.
This is the genus Li.
They're going to give it to someone who doesn't want to give it to someone who doesn't want to give it to someone who doesn't want to give it to someone who doesn't want to give it to someone who doesn't want to give it to someone who doesn't want to give it to someone who doesn't want to give it to someone who doesn't want to give it to someone who doesn't want to give it to someone who doesn't want to give it to someone who doesn't want to give it to them.
They drink everything.
Have men ever done this before?
No, who if I die, in the good fortune they have, are they worth it?
No, it's not worth it, men, I won't do it again.
Eva is safe.
Do it yourself.
If, for example, you're good at it or you're good at it.
You're the only one who can do that.
If you don't drink, you're going to drink.
They're at the bottom.
They don't know what they're talking about.
If I do, I'm going to die.
If I do, the man breaks his back.
Si yon jwon di a
Only one of them drinks it.
Or the salt coat?
How much do you eat, drink, or drink?
Well, if there's only one order, it's going to be the same as a bagal, right?
If, for example, you're rife with yourself or your money, you're going to lose weight.
You don't need to be there or you don't need to be out of your way.
So that the people who were waiting for you could come and run away.
For example, if m te below, pre iskanba, epi lefin m la, m ap pran an.
I'm all for it.
It's not just a matter of time before it's over.
Yon dijan an ba
You're on the bottom.
One day I'm going down.
I'm not going to say it again or I'm going to say it again or I'm going to say it again or I'm going to say it again or I'm going to say it again or I'm going to say it again or I'm going to say it again or I'm going to say it again or I'm going to say it again or I'm going to say it again or I'm going to say it again or I'm going to say it again or I'm going to say it again or I'm going to say it again
Good luck getting down to the bottom of it.
Whether you're doing it or not, you're doing it.
When you're ready, you're ready.
OK, who can order me again?
They're either li or li.
a deboule on the gen order order order so that the order can be returned again with the help of a
I'm going to make a debut.
It's the first time I've done it.
I'm not a beginner.
It's going to come down.
How can you say it again?
I'm going to make sure you're in your pants.
Lafiniba la yon ti jan an as if the plitonbe in pi glisse epi
If there is more to it than meets the eye, I'm going to lose weight.
My friends are on your feet pro voye, wip, enfilè fini, wap tou li li li, anan, wi.
Or pwal or pwal yeah, m'ap glisse down?
Or if I'm moving now as soon as possible.
We're going to take it down.
wap pou glide downwards
It's your fault.
Or for a child.
What am I going to do about it?
If you're ready, you'll want to bring them to me.
The men on the other hand do not need to make a move to bring the whole thing to the table.
I've got a whole bay.
Extinction of your way of life.
We can't afford to lose weight.
One of you is a pitiful potato.
I'm going to send a boulson to someone who doesn't want to do it.
I'm going to tell you how much I'm going to miss you.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
For something I'm not sure about.
on the man on the screen.
How do I get past it?
They're going to have to do something about it.
If they do, they'll steal it.
I don't want to steal them.
Men seponnon and si seponnon chose
Li and his wife.
That's what I'm doing.
Swab runs the example of my poup, so I'll do it.
It's not like you're going to want to fall.
It's not like you're going to want to fall.
It's the epic story.
I'm not going to fall.
I don't know if I'm going to fall.
It's not like I'm going to fall.
Or maybe we're not going to Kembe.
I'm going to talk to you.
D-machine, pochikò pa gen kote wou de machin, pochikò, yon stand?
If you have a driver's license, you're on the road too fast.
There's no such thing as a machine gun.
The machine can be advanced.
You can't do that.
It would be nice if I didn't do that.
I don't want to go on a date like this.
I'm going to do it this way, I'm going to do it this way.
In the meantime, you can get a cold machine.
The new region is located in the heart of the city.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to get a new one.
It's the people who come and go.
They don't do it any more.
They took the code.
I don't know about them.
Let them go!
Li lage l, emperor, sa w w again.
Men, if the code is loaded, the cell code on the panel will be attached to the side.
If the code is not released, I will release it.
They're going to use the code.
They can only give you the code.
I can't even tell you what to do.
Yes sa bef lapri and ap fin depòden vil ap fè sa.
If I do, I'll keep my hands to myself, or I'll keep my hands to myself, or I'll swab them.
If you're going to take a bath, you're going to have to take a bath.
Or by anyone else in the world.
Men or women don't want to.
It's all about who you are.
I want to be able to do this on my own.
I want to keep my account.
It's not just me.
There are some things, whether they are together for a network or two, or they are doing something like that to connect to a network.
Van, van, van pass.
Wi, van, van, dapro, me too or you can be one of these people, I want to ret for every point.
The thing about me is that I don't know anything about it.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
It can be passed through a tree.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
It's either good or bad.
I'm going to ban you.
It's the worst thing in the world, isn't it?
It's time to get out of the way.
The men who knew him were from Cheban.
There's something about the lagoon.
There's nothing wrong with that.
It's good to know that someone who has died will never die again.
The people who died by the Levites.
Something like that.
We're not going to put the right kind of wine on the table.
I'm going to do it again.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
A large number of people have been infected with the virus or have been infected with the virus.
This is how they get their money's worth.
I'm going to try to get my money's worth.
Al mete wajou nou
For example, yes, there is no such thing as a person's true identity.
Whether it's good or bad, I don't know.
Bay sa a bon
Yes, for example, if I am or if I am going to happen.
Or need to do something or someone else.
Take, for example, an example.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
So much so, that you're not the only one.
I've got a lot of money in my pocket.
What are you taking?
What are you doing here, playing guitar?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
Well, if I've ever done anything like this, why don't you do it?
Wal, wal and ann li.
Rende man, how are you still, yourself, and what are you doing?
I am ap kalvi.
He's going to be gay in front of me.
It is a packaged bag.
I'm going to do it again.
I'm going to tell you the truth.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
It's in front of me, and I'm looking forward to seeing what they're going to do.
I don't know if I'm going to say anything.
People sound as if they're always going to want to do something about it.
It's either a or a.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it myself.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do anything right or wrong.
M padjanm pre or wou card
I'd like to see you on the other side of the bay.
M padjanm on the floor
Or you can say
If you don't know what you're talking about, you don't know what you're talking about.
That's what I'm going to do.
There is nothing new about it.
It's good to be with someone like that.
A good person or a bad person doesn't know and a bad person doesn't know and a bad person doesn't know and a bad person doesn't know.
I'm going to tell you about Monti's love.
If you want to get rid of it, you can get rid of it again.
Monti and the dead.
Pracon is here again
A guy who knows everything tells me to keep my head down.
It's all about the genesis.
It's very cold.
Or you can't do it again if you don't want to do it again.
Now that I know what I'm talking about, I can't help it.
And the head of an egranp are coming to sa sa.
If you're on top of the equation, you're on top of it.
What if there is a man with a gene, if he has everything in his head, then there is a man with a gene?
tooth decay.
There are no teeth.
A guy who can't do anything new, on a man's side.
Men and women are connected.
A man who never forgets anything is a man who knows everything about himself.
Don't ever forget what you've been through.
They are no longer in existence.
In order for someone to see something, they must not forget that it is good or bad.
Mon ti bay
I've been through a lot of good times in my career.
Good luck and do the right thing.
It's all about the phone.
The men used to be able to do it.
Or you can't do it because you don't know what it is.
It's not like you're going to be able to keep your head up.
It's a man who doesn't want to die.
The Bakadi gene is compressed.
A guy like you can't get enough of your knowledge.
A man of knowledge is a man of knowledge.
It's not just me.
Anek is a seyèon
I don't know what to do with myself.
I'm going to the bay.
It doesn't matter what you take.
You have the right to be informed of the situation.
The good news is that you can start by entering the pool.
I'm going to start on the ride of things.
We've had so much soap and we're going to have to do it again.
Cankou once is sopasou jelly
It's about what you're going to do with your life.
It's not so much about the bay as it is about the bay.
If you're going to eat it yourself, you're going to eat it yourself.
I'm not sure what's going on.
Or maybe you're the one who's crazy.
I'm not crazy because I don't want to talk about it.
The people in my network are saying it.
They hear the words.
I've heard a lot about karate.
They're either going to go with me or they're going to go with me and they're going to go with me.
Then I'll be back with them again.
It's a man's thing.
Who is it?
There are two young men on me, one young man, one young man, and one young man.
So who are you?
Or, if you can make me feel better, can you?
I'm not sure who I'm talking about anymore.
I'm going to tell you about these people.
It's either that or that.
I'm going to tell you the truth about your words.
The man has a double mantle.
I'm not sure what to do with my teeth.
Good on the man my dad made me say a
I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it to the grocery store or my grandfather's place.
As soon as I can't take it, I'm going to take it easy.
I am a small business owner with a medium-sized business.
I don't think I'm going to give you a name for it.
I can't afford to go to school without the help of the school's Director.
Now he's the CEO of the company.
If you go to school, I'll call you, I'll call you.
On the advice of a lawyer, you should know.
If you are a student at your school, the principal is you.
Gen o dwadi director m
Gen or dwadi bonj or
I'm the only one who can do that.
They went back to school.
It's a man's world.
I'm not going to let you down.
I'm not crazy about a cell phone.
I'm crazy about a cell and a man I'm going to call you.
You know what I mean?
It's good to be in trouble.
I'm so happy to see how much I've been able to do.
There is no such thing as a masterpiece.
Now I know how to call you a professor.
When children are ready for the next stage, they say hello to their teacher.
Congratulations to you all.
Congratulations on the success of the men's team.
Exant l ap kapon non pou pou plede hand a faire or anpi
It's the only time I've seen it.
But I know there's something else.
I can only tell you one thing.
I'm going to put it on the van.
On the one hand, Mary's salvation is a blessing in disguise.
Nou on fi
On the fi ki mary se yon
Sifya mariye salye se yon
My wife and I have not known each other since the last few days.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it myself.
There is no such thing as getting married.
Take it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or something.
And how men can do anything they want to do.
Are you going to show up, or are you going to say hello?
Good luck to you and Mary.
Or say something like that.
Or do you know how to do it in Seyon?
There's a lot more to it than that.
I'm here today to help you.
or an end to the debate.
or in the plazi
men or women.
I'm not sure.
I have changed my mind.
The network is pa exsanp m
I'm going to tell you about it.
I've got a lot of things going on.
I'm the same as everyone else in the world or I'm the only one who knows what's going on.
I don't know anything about life.
I'm going to try and make it easy for you.
I've been looking for a few more.
Bon on personne pa egzan pou konn reto or faire boom
It's going to be a boom.
I'm going to give you a new order.
I'm going to tell you what to do about it.
It's a good thing I'm doing the right thing.
I'm going to have to take a look at it.
It's easy to get caught up in it.
I don't know if I'm going to make it.
There's only one good thing I can do.
I don't know the man.
Well, isn't it time, or can I do something about it?
It's not like I've seen anything like this before.
It's like a ton of Eklari or a ton of Eklari or a ton of Eklari or a ton of Eklari or a ton of Eklari or a ton of Eklari or a ton of Eklari or a ton of Eklari or a ton of Eklari or a ton of Eklari or a ton of Eklari or a ton of Eklari or a ton of Eklari or a ton of Eklari or a ton of Eklari or a ton of Eklari or a ton of Eklari.
Or maybe you'll find another one.
The rhyme makes me appear.
It's all about the street.
Since then, for example, we've seen a lot of things happen.
All the time I've been out of the country, I've been out of the country.
I've been doing this since the morning.
I'm going to talk about it.
It's not that simple.
Let's take the example of e.g.
It's the only thing I can do.
Or you can bite it.
It's up to you to decide whether or not you'll be able to do it.
Whether it's going to happen or not.
It's either a good thing or a bad thing.
Bon si m ap pache m glise epi
I'm sure you'll be able to see some of them.
Good as a guy, for example.
That's right.
I've got the whole thing.
We will discuss whether to come or go.
And then there's the fight.
Discussion with the men on the le yo yo yo toude vini bon or du sa yo t ap faire a yo on tijan
And they're not going to make you wine.
If you don't have a baggage claim, you can check the baggage claim on a baggage claim.
I don't want to do that anymore.
I don't want to know.
I'm with you guys.
So that's why I'm going to say goodbye to you again.
If you don't fight, you can't beat yourself up.
I'll be there if you want me to.
I don't want to give you a birthday like this.
And now we can do it again.
M pa gen donatan yon card again
For example, everyone who wants to see Katya continues to see her.
I'm here to help you.
They've won it again.
It's not like you're going to be able to do it.
or by general order jan an
Or I can say
On some people, for example eee
I'm here to help you.
And if I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it.
They're going to kill you.
Or two people in the vicinity of the bay.
I've come a long way since I was a kid.
I'm going to tell you something that's not going to happen.
It's a good thing you're here.
You're going to have to make a decision.
They're not happy.
They're not happy.
I'm not going to say it again.
They have a problem.
Or at least something like that.
Enpi, or what about the matter of killing the woman?
Are you going to kill me?
I have calculated.
Do I count men, or do I count all these people?
Enpi, or what would be the point of killing her?
Why did you kill your wife?
What are you going to do or do you want to do?
There's nothing wrong with that.
It's going to be a good one.
It makes them feel uncomfortable.
It's all over the place.
They're not going to be able to keep up with you.
There's no way things are going to come out of nowhere.
Se refleche l ap reflechi
All day long I've been with my baby.
I'm still here today.
It's not your fault.
I'm a big fan of who you are.
There are two ways to win.
They've won since they've been on the podium.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you.
I'm going to solve my own problems and I'm not going to talk to anyone else about what happened to me.
There is no such thing as a calculator.
They don't even know what the problem is.
I don't know if there's another one anymore.
They have a problem.
They're not OK.
That's why I'm here to stay.
On the one hand, there is a tendency for people to feel that way about themselves.
on those who have died.
When a person dies of epilepsy.
These are the kinds of men they are.
For example, w ap di li li li li li li to sa
But I don't know if there's anything else I can do.
I'm going to tell you why.
It's all about calcium.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to do that.
They are in a state of confusion.
So if someone is going to make a mistake, I'm going to give you two faces and I'm going to give you two faces.
I'm going to tell you a lot of things about the future.
I'm defining men in a way that makes sense.
It's a very nice place to visit.
It's not just a matter of calculating how much you're going to lose, but how much you're going to lose.
If you suffer from hunger, you know who you are.
There is no such thing as grangou nou pran.
I'm going to give it a try.
I'm going to try again.
There's no such thing as a free lunch again.
M kwae gen dwe gen order chan l
You're going to have to do something to kill me.
or di chagren
Or do anything to kill the person.
They're not going to be able to keep up with what they're doing.
Se chagren or sot of men
It's either men's or women's.
Men on the other side of the world.
It's not just a matter of time.
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
If you can't say anything about killing people, you can't.
Or they can chagren and kill new people.
I'm going to tell you the same thing as I'm going to tell you.
Or you can say something about killing someone new.
I've always wanted to kill people.
You're not good enough.
For example, what happens to a person or a lot of things that happen to him or her is not so bad.
I'm sure you'll be able to find a new one.
And who knows what I'm going to do with it.
I'm not sure who I'm talking about.
A person who does not make the person the pen for the same person.
They know about other things.
If someone is on the other side of the door, they can't or won't walk.
Or why?
Whether it's a walk in the park, a walk in the park, a walk in the woods, or a walk in the woods, it's not like I'm going to tell you anything.
Men like to call it a nightmare.
The idol is bayid.
The people they serve.
How do you know?
I'm one of those people who don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
They're on the verge of collapse.
The good thing or the bad thing or the bad thing or the bad thing or the bad things or the bad things or the bad things or the bad things or the bad things or the bad things or the bad things or the bad things or the bad things or the bad things or the bad things or the bad things or the bad things or the bad things or the bad things or the bad things or the bad things or the bad things or the bad things or the bad things.
I don't want to do this because I know about my brother Pat ladanne.
I don't want to go back to the drawing board.
I don't know what to do.
I don't want to do it again.
Or don't do it again.
A man or a woman who knows a man is a man's criterion.
They can be taken with ladanne or soda.
or di or pa
Now or never.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you.
It's not a new thing or a new thing.
I'm not alone in this.
When someone does something or does something, everyone can do something that doesn't make a good person feel bad.
They're very nice.
You've got to get it right.
They're just men.
There's no way around it.
They don't have to do it.
They don't know what they're doing.
They don't understand what it's like to take a guy like that.
There's no way I'm going to make it.
I don't know what to do with myself.
There's a lot of stuff going on behind the scenes.
Or tell something in front of or behind the counter.
You tell things in front of and behind the counter.
It's a combo for men.
Enbyen well yeah
If, for example, you are an ancestor,
I don't know what I'm going to do next.
There's no such thing as a free lunch again.
or know how to find it.
on se ride adult a depou rancontre yo
If you can do anything about it.
I'm not sure if that's true or not.
It's not like I'm dying.
If you're going to sell your stuff, you're going to sell it.
I'm an adult now and I'm a teenager.
The twelfth birthday of an adult.
It's not like we're going to be able to do anything about it, or if we're going to be able to do something about it.
Stop the bleeding or stop the bleeding.
I don't want to stop thinking about myself.
Stop beating yourself up and beating yourself up.
or my blog.
Timon became a battalion commander at the end of the war.
This is how I came to know you.
I want to be a part of your business and the world I live in.
That's why I'm here.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do next.
I'm going to tell you about Sispann or Sispann.
Se pa jouure
Stop talking to me as soon as possible.
A person who is the chief of the waj two nmi
I know that the team will stop at full speed as soon as possible.
It's good if you've got a big bottle of wine or something.
o vin la kay o moun
How many people do what they do?
They're looking for a way to retire.
They're going to have to go to bed to get a good night's sleep.
I'm going to tell you about it.
They did it.
Li considers you
He considers you to be a man of his age.
I'm not going to lie to you.
Li reskonsanm ou an
If you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't,
It's like going down the aisle.
I've been talking to these people ever since.
Reskonsanm or his husband.
Even if the person doesn't have something they want to send to the borrower, they will do all the harm they can to you.
I'm going to tell you about it.
They're making a living.
I've got my teeth made.
Men as if they were receiving a refund at home.
It's a very good recipe.
I'm trying my best to get it back.
He's a good guy and he's a good guy.
I don't know if you're going to see this guy.
I'll talk to you again or I'll listen to you again.
It's just that I don't care.
We don't see the whole thing and we don't even know if he's a guy.
Se sa only yo kondi
I don't care if you're a guy or not.
He's not a guy.
You've got a lot of energy and a lot of energy.
There's a lot of money to be made.
I know I'm not a guy.
On the number of users in the app account.
Or from one of them.
You can get married to a lot of people.
A guy who says good things when he doesn't know he's a guy who talks about someone else.
Toutan fè bay yo men vat the condition of one person to 2
Think about the condition of the person you are dealing with.
Yo condition an tou condition a person devye
For example, a person is a person.
I've known people since I was a kid, and I've known people since I was a kid.
We're not the only ones who know.
Who are we?
Kicha ki, anna chalitab.
When you take a series of people, understand who you're talking to.
Or with the person in question.
Some people take it with grap.
We're going to have to listen to some of them.
The concert of the two people I'm friends with is to make a pleasant noise as if it were a business and a pleasure.
I'm going to tell you a story about a man who's happy with his card.
Who are you?
It's either one or the other.
If you're looking for someone who doesn't, you're looking for someone who doesn't.
Like the same lotus.
There is no one like him or anyone else like him.
We'll never be able to do it again.
I'm going to do everything for the best.
To all those who are happy and who are happy.
It's not about who you are, it's about who you are, it's about who you are, it's about who you are, it's about who you are, it's about who you are, it's about who you are, it's about who you are, it's about who you are, it's about who you are, it's about who you are, it's about who you are, it's about who you are, it's about who you are, it's about who you are.
It's not about the people and the people.
I'm not sure what to do with it.
We are the only ones who know how to do a series of nice things.
Bon is directed by Michel Sonsan and starring.
There is no problem with one or two people.
At the end of the day, we're going to pay for it.
As the Chief of the Defence Staff, he decides what to do.
There are many people who have such a good job.
I can't wait to see what else I can do.
It's about people who love to talk about other issues and things that affect people.
We like to play with people.
It's all over now.
If you're in love with someone, you're in love with someone.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
Bef la takan
One person, for example, has everything to do with it.
We've got a lot of things going on.
The swan is a great man, and the swan is a great man, and the swan is a great man, and the swan is a great man, and the swan is a great man, and the swan is a great man, and the swan is a great man, and the swan is a great man, and the swan is a great man, and the swan is a great man, and the swan is a great man, and the swan is a great man, and the swan is a great man, and the swan is a great man, and the swan is a great man.
The great people of the world around you are the ones who have no one to turn to again and again.
I'm sure you'll find that I'm not the only one.
What about the sea?
I'm sure you'll be able to get a feel for the situation.
It's a phone call to other people.
A good and generous child is one who is willing to do things for others.
I don't want to make another phone call to anyone or anything but Takadi.
and pren tifi
You don't have to do anything that makes someone else feel bad about you.
But I'm not sure I want to do it myself.
This is not the case with the rebels.
Well, if a person who has been attacked by an enemy does a fight, if one of them has been attacked, what will you do?
No, I'm pleading with the people to fight, say, wab di l sisponn, or no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. I'm pleading with the people to fight, say, wab di l sisponn, or no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
What I'm going to do is lead the way.
It's not like I'm going to eat it.
Li Malèv Ve and I Pa
There are three generations per annum.
There are three types of people who can't or won't be able to afford it.
Well, either you do something or you don't want to do it for example, and someone does it as if it's not, it's perfect.
I don't know what I'm going to do, but I'm going to do it.
Pay with your credit card.
It's time for you to come back.
Pass or say goodbye to the room and to the bathroom.
I would like to see an order that is not too good.
I'm not going to lie to anyone.
I'll tell you what I'm going to do.
It's all about a
For example, do or don't do it.
It's either that or it's just that.
Come on, or I'll talk to you, I'll talk to you, or I'll tell you what to do.
Are you ready, or are you ready?
on the guy tout tan
It's been a long time since I've seen one.
I've been delighted with people who want to see me fight with you.
Who's right, still right?
Some of the players will be able to play as well as win.
That's the way it can be.
I don't know where a few guys are.
I just wanted to say or do not remember.
men now or later.
The thing is, I've never seen anything like this before.
The mountains are steeped in history and are steeped in history.
There are a lot of tank messages.
Or believe in it.
I'm going to try to find out what's going on here.
A person or a group of people is called a person or a group of people depending on the situation.
The right-hand side is 12.
This is not Ayatou.
What are you going to do about it?
I knew I could do it right now.
I'm at work.
They're together and they're together.
There are people who have known such things in the past.
I know I'm going to tell you something else I'm going to tell you again.
It's not my fault.
I'm going to go back to Seyoun or to the other side of the world, and I'm going to go back again.
You can't or won't.
People who know how to talk to each other.
It's been a long time since I've been in this position.
What do you know about it?
O pa gen order li yon can be re-released again
I'm going to have to go back to the drawing board again.
I'm not going to say it again.
I'm not sure if I'm ready for it.
I'm here now.
Your tank is also known as Tanginen.
Or you're going to die.
There is no such thing as tanginen
tijan rele a
Ben chak gen non
Chak gen non.
It's the same with Kalin.
It's been a long time since I've heard of you.
I've come a long way in front of you.
I'm going to come out well long molé
I'm going to school or I'm going to college.
Or you can say that you can't do it.
It's not like I'm drunk or anything.
Or you can tell me how to prepare for it.
Who are the people who don't want to see me and why do they want to see me?
Took a lot of time to drink, but it's not like that.
End of Sa Ga Deviyen
This is why I'm here to help you.
We are not Christians anymore.
It's a good name for it.
What's the big deal?
I've come a long way since then.
I know a lot about dancing.
Or don't come too far now to travel the world.
If the man or the probe is not in the same place as the man or the probe, there are two of them.
I'm going to make sure that I'm ready for it.
I'm not going to take it anymore.
Or the screw.
This is the area where men live.
I'm going to eat it.
wi chak gen non va yo
The genome is located in the genome.
The genome of the genome is known as the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome is known as the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome of the genome.
You've got a long way to go.
And before you run away, we're going to give you a break.
It's not a canine.
We're going to defeat you and we're going to defeat you and we're going to defeat you.
I'm not going to say anything but I'm not going to say anything.
Men are the only men who can make a difference in their lives.
They won't be able to keep up with a red-collared business, and they won't be able to keep up with a red-collared business.
who are not hairy.
There's a lot of hair on your face.
There are men who have died.
Li pa wouj
They grew their hair together.
Cheven andemi, Cheven andemi, so on and so on in this area.
It's the kind of thing that makes you feel like you're the best person in the world, and that's what makes you feel like you're the best person in the world.
Two of the same triples in the fleet.
What kind of illness do you know?
I'm not going to release the disease as soon as possible.
Anterit M ap is known to l
or pa t know li
I don't know what to do with myself because I don't know what to do with myself.
On the one hand, or on the other hand, or on the other hand, or on the other hand, or on the other hand, or on the other hand, or on the other hand, or on the other hand, or on the other hand, or on the other hand, or on the other hand, or on the other hand, or on the other hand, or on the other hand, or on the other hand, or on the other hand, or on the other hand, or on the other hand, or on the other hand, or on the other hand, or on the other hand, or
Or not well with them.
That's why I'm here.
A man on a business trip can even play a game of cat and mouse if something is wrong with him.
What kind of man is he?
The man who said, "Yeah, yeah, there's no one else".
There is no one to know.
It's because of the fact that you're holding onto it or just not.
But all I can do is make an angel so much more than anything else.
I'm sure you'll be able to keep up with the heat.
I told you I was good and I was good.
on such a great person for example K ap pale
People who are children of non
It's not that bad.
I want to withdraw the account.
No, I can't withdraw this account, there are two of them.
You're not alone, you're not alone.
That's the only way I can read it.
You can't say no, and you can't say no.
He knows the name of the person he is talking to.
I'm not going to say who I am.
It's not my fault.
Even if they say the words.
There's no such thing as an expanse of people who don't know what they're talking about.
I'm going to make sure they're coming.
They feel like the things that make them even talk to me about my poultry.
It's not a child's idea!
Whether you say li, m, or you can't control a, you can't control or you can't control someone.
They are not controlled or, if they are children, if they are adults.
And then there's the new one.
I've always been fascinated by passion.
Two or three generations of any of the Men
I'm not a person who's possessed by demons or who's not born into a family of like-minded people.
Good or bad animals live in the water.
It's been so long since we've had a secret.
and renmet water.
Regril is a.
Or that it's a monche of Oseyon.
Or you can't.
It's like having a baby.
I'm not sure if this is true or not, but I'm sure it's true.
I can't wait to see what's new.
It's either that or it's not.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it.
It's either that or it's that.
And that's the way it is.
I want to change my life.
It's the first thing I've ever done in my life.
Matten l move
Li jon an card again
They're always on the lookout for the money, and they're always on the lookout for someone else.
One card l ordered again
You're the same guy.
You're the same guy as A.
It's the morning after tomorrow.
Or appear old, so you can have a good time talking to them.
I'm sure you'll be able to help me with that.
Now you know what to eat.
I don't know what to say.
What are you doing or what are you doing?
Don't worry about me now or never.
It's time to go back to the bay.
Se jedife wap mete
This is because I can't afford to lose weight.
We're going to have to go back to the drawing board.
I'm going to do the same thing.
I'm going to do my job together.
It's a good series of people.
When a person is in a good mood, he or she is doing well.
They don't take it easy.
If I take it I don't know what it is.
I'm the second new one.
fatigre or an jen
Or a man who can't help himself.
If you have children, you are a child.
It's the same with John.
Or a man
or master devyen.
They don't have to do this, they don't have to work for a great man, the son of Gijisal.
That's just the way it is, isn't it?
Hey, who's the man who's ever made a man's face to look like a giant, who's that?
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
No one knows how to tank again.
Parik san pou or t ap lè lè dòmi en peraj nou gade nan
And then there's the two of you.
The sun or the li gen.
Okay, well, to know who you are or who you are, or what you're going to do, who are you?
Chak said, yes, as in the past, so much water, good day, so much water, so much sunshine.
You've got a lot to say.
Or maybe I'll sleep for a day or two.
Or they're going to have to pay for it.
People who love to talk about their lives.
I know seven people who use you even when I'm in your shoes.
Who is a Judah?
I've never used it before.
I'm not ordering any more.
You're not alone.
Onnonm pa exsanf
That's what I'm talking about.
I'm happy to be here for you.
I'm sure you'll be able to help me with that.
Bwen jou I don't see what's going on with people.
I can't wait to see what you're up to.
It's only a matter of time before you see it.
It's not like anyone else is watching it.
It should be ordered by one of the card holders.
If you want to be a man, if you want to be a man, if you want to be a man, if you want to be a man, if you want to be a man, if you want to be a man, if you want to be a man, if you want to be a man, if you want to be a man, if you want to be a man, if you want to be a man, if you want to be a man, if you want to be a man, if you want to be a man, if you want to be a man.
Well, man, if you're a guy like that, you're a son of a bitch.
On the guy who's all over the place.
It's either a or a.
or di tout tan
I've been waiting for you to call me back.
On the people who have everything to do with it.
The people of the country have been baptized.
I'm going to tell you about it.
Yo pa re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re
Chide the guy ap pale
It's time for you to do it.
It's a great way to get to know each other.
I'm going to blog about it.
It doesn't stop there.
It's all about the genesis.
I'm not going to lie.
It's not like I don't want to sit on a chair.
It's now or never.
or palye seri
The men can use the epi despite the fact that they're good guys and that they're good kids.
Yo pa de order chan again
Or from the guy in the relay.
Or from the guy.
The guy said that I was going to betray him.
Now we don't know if there's any other way.
Or at least two others.
Or to prevent me from doing other things.
On all the men and women in the world.
I can understand how I've been doing it myself.
I'm going to tell you what I can do.
It's a man who cares.
I'm in love with you.
I love you because you love me.
I'm sorry to bother you.
I don't know, or I don't know, or I don't know, or I don't know, or I don't know, or I don't know, or I don't know, or I don't know, or I don't know, or I don't know, or I don't know, or I don't know, or I don't know, or I don't know, or I don't know, or I don't know, or I don't know, or I don't know, or
It's not a good idea.
It's the only way to get around it.
I've got a lot more to do than that.
The person who is in charge of your business is not in charge of your business.
I'm not sure if this is a good idea.
It's not a man's dream.
Onk gen dwa di mouchè onk gen dwa di mouchè onk gen dwa di mouchè onk gen dwa di mouchè onk gen dwa of mouchè onk gen dwa of mouchè onk gen dwa of mouchè onk gen dwa of mouchè onk gen dwa of mouchè onk gen dwa of mouchè onk gen dwa of mouchè onk gen dwa of mouchè onk gen dwa of mouchè onk gen dwa of mouchè onk gen dwa of mouchè onk gen dwa of mou
There is no such thing as a new life.
If there's anything I can do about it right now, you know.
That's good, OK.
I'm going to buy figou, I'm going to buy figou.
So, OK, what's the answer again?
One such person is a scoundrel and never knows what's going on again.
I don't know if it's true or not.
On the man, for example, Kichita la
Li wine as if I'm going to say w
There is no one who can help you.
They don't know what they're doing now.
I don't know how to use it anymore.
There are seven red flags and seven red flags.
wè vika woujou from
I don't know.
It's not like I'm going to be able to keep my head down.
There is no such thing as an omaltouri.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it.
If you're a hypocrite, you can always call each other, but you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't.
I can't do that or do anything else.
I know you're going to have to go through this when you're done and now you're going to have to go through this again.
It's up to you.
Or who are you?
or in men.
No one will ever know if they are dead or alive again.
It's not a big deal.
Se wè contròlè lang yo di
You don't have to wait until you've controlled it.
The men are in control of the killing.
It's not like I don't know what I'm talking about.
You're not going to be able to do it again.
Now, as in the past.
I'm going to tell you a lot of things.
A knife is cut off from your neck of the woods.
For example, all tankan to.
You can't beat someone if you can't do the right thing.
Who's to say what you're talking about?
Only then will you be re-elected.
Or at least I'll be there.
I'm not going to lie to you.
The men who were there were very pleased with the results.
It's not just a question of how it's done.
I'm not sure if I'm going to win or lose.
I'm going to have to do something about it.
I'm going to live in paradise.
Yo pa order jan anpò pi
I'll give you an example.
He is the founder of Chepa Compound.
I've met some men in the past.
It's the last thing I want to do.
How can you eat it?
Who are you?
about something or love or desire something beautiful.
I don't know if I'm going to order again.
Well, I'm going to tell you something nice.
There's another way I'm going to get back to you.
men or of those who have been exalted to the exaltation of God.
lap ranye chemis veranje chapòle
Soul gadeye li lap do
Or you can say
What's the point of doing it?
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do if I don't know what I'm going to do.
Basically, people don't want to do anything or anything.
I'm not going to be able to do a lot of things without them.
I'm going to take a bath if I can.
It's not like I'm going to do it.
Some of them are a.
I'm not going to talk to anyone, even if I don't want to talk to anyone or anything.
They're always on my side.
So, I don't know of anyone who's going to entertain me.
I don't want to be with someone who's a nobility.
I've never heard of anyone who's been there before.
It's all good then.
It's a good thing to be happy.
There's nothing I can do about it.
I don't know what to do with myself.
It's the only thing I can do again.
I don't know anything else.
I can't help but wonder.
I can't put my finger on it.
Again, I will not do it again.
I could tell you something else.
For example, if a person takes a position in a given situation, he or she will take a position in a given situation.
You can't blame people for what they're doing.
The rapper is married for a year.
I've got a lot of people here.
Don't worry about it.
It's the same person who's been there.
Or believe it's the only thing I know about in life.
I don't know who he is.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything about it.
What's the reason?
It's not my fault that I'm not a woman.
You've been here for a long time now.
There are people who don't even know Jakik.
And then there's the second one.
It's not the same person.
There are more people than there are people.
It's the kind of thing that makes a person proud.
Don't be too happy, hey!
Lamayis dakwa with you so sa
If you're going to give me a real contact, I understand why you're not going to tell me that.
Or don't order them to do it again.
Do you know who the person is who he is?
It's a good thing that I'm a fan of anyone else's.
It's in the hands of three people.
If a person who has been in a relationship for a year has a reason to be in a relationship with another person, he or she must be in a relationship with another person.
It's like a man and a woman.
Listening to competitors is a wike.
This is a gen.
Oh well, what's the point?
It's almost like a man.
A good man is a good man.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
I don't know if it's a good idea.
Some of you have been given the opportunity to do so.
They have won the prize for the first time.
We're going to buy it and buy it.
How to make people new to life.
I love the guy who's been there.
People like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like
Asse or pa gen yon pral mande pri te prof
I'm going to do what I can or can't do.
Men or women can't eat.
If you're going to make a mistake, you're not going to make a mistake.
Grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, grandfather, and grand
People are looking for a grandmother, a grandmother, a grandmother, a beautiful new one.
Anisa is anxious about your card again
That's what I'm doing.
I'm going to make a great deal of noise.
I'm going to do it.
The people are going to make a big band.
Gen lòdiche again
It's all about the people.
I'm going to be a grandmother.
I don't think you're going to be able to do that.
A series of children's genres.
I talked to you and told you I didn't want to do it.
For the great man who did it.
Great people are the things that make me happy.
You're the one who's focused on listening to a child do or do.
I can tell you why I'm here.
It's a colorful pocket.
The dead know the end.
It's not like they're going to be able to keep their heads up.
There is no one to blame.
Gen yon people
For example, a fi
They're getting married in the words of Philip.
I can't wait to get started.
I don't want to say everything when I don't want to say no.
I'm thinking of something new here.
Or from the top of Mt.
Hey, men after, who are you messing with?
Disorder, wi di disorder, ann, dakò, disorder vil ravansè di, or di sa to, wi, wè de compè to?
Or good batwon
W ap work with li
Now you're on your own.
I can't wait to see what you're up to.
I made my debut as a chef.
I don't know anything about it.
We're going to do something like this.
It's a great way to get things done.
I can make a move.
You're moving my radius.
My cell is radiating.
You're not the only one.
Li pa dansan li
They are dancing together.
Men are not allowed to go to their faces.
That's all I've ever written.
Men are not allowed to do the same thing.
Don't be afraid to ask for help.
It's the same thing.
Or you can't read it.
There's something else I can do.
That's how they end up with their deaths.
It's not just about men, it's about men.
Or you can't stay away from it.
It's not going to happen.
Or they will condye tout mwen On people like you coming
It's either dead or alive.
It's about who's doing it.
That's what I'm doing.
They are fravagant.
It's about the people who make you feel that way.
Even if they don't, they're not going to be able to do it.
It's the first thing I've ever done that I've ever done in my life.
I'm going to tell you again.
It's not like I'm a pedophile.
Who are you and who are you?
You're the only one who knows how to live.
I thought I'd say a word.
I thought of the words.
They're so good that they don't have anything to do with it.
Help me to get up there.
And he didn't.
If you are able to move up and down the stairs, you will be able to move up and down the stairs.
Yo pa kab on bakay bon i don't know how to watch tv
They are in the devil's possession.
It's made of rye and soybeans.
I'm going to go to other mediums.
That's why I'm here.
One illness is ill.
Gen fell all the way down when I fell.
All tandan mout sa gen malkadi
I know they are Malchadians.
It's in the genome.
I'm going to tell you something.
I've always wanted to go back to the drawing board.
This is the name of the person who is in Malkadya.
They won't let me down.
It's a great way to say goodbye.
They will be taken back to the drawing board.
They don't know what they're talking about.
On the one hand, everything is taken up and falling into the hands of men.
I'll be there before the bay breaks down.
I don't think anyone knows how to do it.
who sal nekligans
It's not easy.
If someone is going to make a brick.
One of these days, you're all trembling.
I'm the only one who knows.
You don't know what you're getting yourself into.
You're going to die.
You are the same thing that comes down from heaven.
It's time to move on to good things.
I'm going to put this guy on the floor as a son of a bitch when the sun goes down.
I'm going to get out of here and I'm going to win.
It's like someone's father.
That's the only way to go.
Somebody's going to be a cappuccino again.
I'm going to order again Bon
For example, on a number of occasions.
on tijan de lala
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
You've got the same thing going for you.
A few feet away from the scene.
They're not going to be able to get away with it.
It's not easy being a man.
Some people say.
I'm on the right track.
As a result, it is possible to generate two generations.
The only thing that matters now is that it's the same.
As a matter of fact, I'm not sure.
It's not about the characters.
I don't know anybody.
The men who ride the horse won't win the race.
Li gen dwa ap mache la epi
They're taking things.
and good men.
I'm not going to let you down.
We're not going to be able to do it again.
It's not easy.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it myself.
It's not just me, it's someone else.
Li pa gen order chan yo di nan sa
They don't want to do it.
It's the first time I've seen it.
It's a man's call.
It's not about anyone else.
We are not the ones who have to deal with it.
They're not going to be able to keep up with what they're doing and they're not going to be able to keep up with what they're doing.
It's the first time I've ever seen a guy like that.
Or you'll be on the other side of the bay in a timely manner.
I'm going to live in this world.
Yo difile a dò
It's true whether or not he's a man.
If I die, I will be able to do it.
There is also a link to your website.
They borrowed anything.
They're not going to be able to do it.
It's either you or me.
He's such a guy.
It's your man.
I've been here nine times.
Many people have sounmoufis and made a new climb to Escaladè
Onnonm pa exant gen yon kote sila l bagage Ay
They can die.
I don't know anything about Miche like that.
Or don't do something like that again.
People are at risk.
I'm going to risk it.
There is a risk that they will not be able to do it.
I don't know how to do this.
What's going on here?
There's nothing wrong with that.
I've been thinking about it for a while now.
I'm going to tell you a secret, but I'm not going to tell you a secret.
So good-bye, there's no problem with that.
And then there's the man, hey!
Salfè la, the man who is Esther, or who is you, the man who is you, the man who is you, the man who is you, the man who is you, the man who is you, the man who is you, the man who is you, the man who is you, the man who is you, the man who is you, the man who is you, the man who is you, the man who is you, the man who is you.
The wine is salty, and it looks scandalous, it looks scandalous, yeah!
I've got my own wine.
If I'm going to talk to them, they're going to talk to me.
I'm going to talk to you about it.
w ap pale in pi m de a vye
I'm going to tell you something about my dad.
I'm going to do the same thing.
I'm going to do the same thing for you.
or gen dwan di monchè pa
I don't know if I'll ever be able to do it again.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to keep up or talk too much.
It's too pale for that.
It's too pale.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to do it again.
I don't know if it's too bad or too bad.
That's why I'm here.
I don't know what they're doing or how they're doing.
I'm not sure what to do with them.
There is no such thing as a Moukiyè.
The people of your country know what's going on.
People like you are the one who has to face the consequences of your actions.
They're on the verge of collapse.
Once again, there is no order.
Good numbers, for example.
It's good to take people even outside.
or genmanaj or ever since.
Or to make you walk men on men's backs the same way you do.
Or move your soul to a place where you can make a difference.
Jen sa kijalou
He's a guy who's got a lot on his mind.
On the man on the other hand, I'm already in your shoes.
Or something like that.
Or it would be so good if I didn't keep tankil
I'm not going to do anything with him.
This is your way of thinking about the tank.
This is why you have to pay attention to your tank.
I'm not sure what to say.
This is how you get to the net tankil
M ap goumen avèn pou tankè or gen dwa se pa goum mon gouman with plus
The list also includes peton gabouya and kula.
Ap Peton gabouya and On the man
They're a man of many talents.
As if I were to tell you, you could win any.
I don't want to lose everything I own.
They don't like the people who win at the table to win, and they don't like the people who don't win.
Oftentimes, malfeasance is the fact that people know that a grandmother is malfeasant and that I am not doing it.
Or as a man who likes to make friends with a man who is too young to know his son Malfeté.
I'm going to make it to the table.
So that I can remove the animal or men's knees.
A new knee or genitals is a child's genitals.
The person who prefers to cut off the head of the child is the same or he is always seized by you.
I'm going to have to do the same thing.
So much so that I've been able to do the same thing for a while.
I'm going to add a
Whoever is an ambassador is an ambassador.
It is an ambition of the masses.
Good on those who are in the water of life.
The thing is, I'm going to do a series of debays in the water.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
Or a child who does too much to drink water.
It's easy to lose or re-release.
They didn't break anything new.
They're right here.
It's not about the details.
There is no order one or more can be ordered again
If a child is born with a disability, he or she will not be able to do so.
I'm pleading with many of them.
I'm sure they'll be there.
It's not like a child is being controlled.
A general order is not to be repeated if a child is born.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do much more than that or if I'm going to be able to do more than that.
You've got a lot of people on the lookout for you.
or pa di ranyan
I'll give you a little detail about it.
Only so or in part.
Pete is back again.
or more in detail.
meten li meten or
I'm sorry to disappoint you guys.
The baggage of the person is yours.
I've met people who know how much I love them.
There are a lot of people out there who make a bag 5 making a bag to get married.
I'm going to tell you about it.
This is a generic term.
We don't give a shit about what's going on.
I'm going to make a bag and I'm going to make a bag.
I'm going to release it now.
We have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we have a bag and we
You've got a lot to do with it.
I'm sure you'll find a way to get in touch with me.
I don't know what they are.
Li or yo know men
On the man to be exchanged with you on the man to be called to account.
You are a member of the Telangana State Legislative Council.
They won two things in a row.
I don't know how to take a guy like that.
This is Telugu Ok
as a service to the community.
You're not going to be able to do it again.
How or how do you tell me the thing?
I'm here to tell you what you're up to.
It's not for the people who are doing the right thing, it's for the people who are doing the right thing.
There is no such thing as a problem.
On the man who has been hanging on meton, he is completely at the top of the mile.
They're wearing a lot of badge.
I'm not sure what they're up to.
We're going to school together, and we're going to school together.
But the man who came to me to file a petition for a writ of habeas corpus.
W ap is the son of a man who is too much to ask for.
La yo know yo know fa a twi, wii, eh?
I don't want to take anyone who doesn't want to go to the bathroom.
It's not that good.
I'm sure you've got it all figured out.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it.
It's like tennis.
If I don't wear tennis, I'll meet only one man.
If you're playing tennis, you can't beat yourself up.
Chipo te tou is also available.
It's all about the soul.
That's too much.
It's like a proof of concept.
Pa gen lòdichan yo di lanfo
It's just that you can't do it.
Pa gen lòdichan No
I know what you're talking about.
The mistress of another's wife.
Don't have any other passions or be on your toes.
You are the son of a man who loves you.
Love to do the wrong thing.
about the person you love.
In order to be able to do so, I am interested.
Don't be fooled into answering the question.
Men on such a scale.
There is no such thing as persecution, no such thing as movement, no such thing as speech, no such thing as persecution, no such thing as persecution.
You're going to have to do something else to make a difference in people's lives.
I'm not a dentist.
It's not that simple.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do next.
After all, I'm ready.
Or believe that you can't believe it.
The man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man who trained the man.
You're going to have a bad time.
That's what people are talking about.
They're going to get away with it.
There are two types of a.
There are two other ways to do this.
I don't want to make this guy feel bad.
Despite the advancement of L..
A, that people are complete, but I'm competitive, there's no such thing as a foolish person.
Li pa persis ton people fwon thing
There are two types of people.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
Or don't worry about the other person's fwon thing.
I'm not sure I'm going to do anything.
They've been around for a long time, and they've been around for a long time.
I know how much I love it.
If you're a man, you're a man.
I can't stand or move.
You are your mother's best friend.
It's not like I don't have a lot of money.
They're ahead of the curve on the guy.
In the end, I'm going to tell you about a guy who's a big fan.
The guy in the face.
It's a great drain.
I want to know who I am.
This is how salt monkadi is made.
And then there's the difference.
It's not about who you are.
It's about having a relationship with a man or a woman.
There are so many others.
It's not that we don't want to talk about men, it's that we want to ask them questions.
You know how many men I take.
I'm retin kray with li
Men and women are more likely to get married than men.
I'm going to make you feel better.
I'm going to do things.
Or, do they have a reputation as such?
Men, are there any other things I know about me, or do I know about you?
Men, women, and women!
If you want to know who you are, you are mine.
God is God and God is man.
It's called Granfonia.
He is one of the most famous of the Kouwè people.
gwen yon mesye kabilse li
Kabilse wine down the line.
It's not just me, it's people.
The men are still there.
It's only a few minutes away from the beach.
They're coming to a close.
There's two guys in the middle.
I asked them to remember the guy.
I asked him if he wanted to be a prisoner, but he didn't want me to be a prisoner.
I'm going to introduce you.
I'm sure you're all right.
You are the only one who can do this.
He asked me if I knew who he was.
When I'm not a man, I can't help it.
Instead, they took a route of ten dinas and a favex from the people, and they gave them a denarius.
No, they'll take this man, they'll take this man, they'll take him, they'll take him, they'll take him, they'll take him, they'll take him, they'll take him, they'll take him, they'll take him, they'll take him, they'll take him, they'll take him, they'll take him, they'll take him, they'll take him, they'll take him, they'll take him, they'll take him, they'll take him, they'
I can feel myself with him.
I want to be with you.
Are you the guy in the room?
I bought the water for the guy.
You're the guy I want to see.
Even the mangizyoun atwot at
There are many ways to win over a brother and sister.
Men are not prepared.
I'm ready for this guy.
Take me as my friend.
There is no one to blame.
People don't want to leave the country.
If the wine is made from water, it can be made from both sides of the table.
You're the guy who's been drinking wine.
Li Pouvouzye and the guys there.
I can't wait to get out of here.
I can feel the vibrancy of it.
a term masisik wouj
It's a great wine tasting experience.
I'm not sure what's going on underneath it.
It's the only way to win.
It's the same man.
There is no anti-nigger lagon brother there are two li li li li lè l
It's like they're here.
It's not wine.
I'm not the one who's going to kill you.
Wa know yo rele yo contra mousach nan OK non
to the gen 3 foot
That's how they're going to call you.
If we don't have a line, we'll have a foot in the door.
We've got a lot of things going on.
We're going to have to do something about it.
It's not like I'm sitting here.
I'm going to tell you something.
I'm not sure if it's the right thing to do.
This is the only thing that the rulers of the world have ever known.
They're still there, they're still in the playoffs.
Yo parole bay sa yo tabourè tou
My word is that I'm not going to be able to keep my word.
I've been banned from releasing it.
They're also banned.
I have one more question.
Look behind you because there's no Democratic answer.
19 Se 2005 Se mang bagai form si mta di o
I'll take it or leave it.
That's why I'm here.
This is the only way to take it and put it in the palm of your hand.
I know how to cut off my papak.
I know someone who's going to make you want to make you want to make a difference with them.
Yo rete bay Isalla a.
It's something you buy and it's a bottle and it's a bottle.
Something like a gene.
It's the only way to get rid of them.
I'm going to cut it down and I'm going to take it.
I put it in the water and put it in the water.
I know I'm going to buy you a drink.
How do you know?
I know how to drive.
It's something that people have long wanted to buy when they go to the bathroom.
I don't know who you are.
There are many people who are addicted to alcohol.
Kon tigou bay.
Grandmother knows how to drink so much that she walks.
Li kimen yo anik pran li yo videy nan i bottle little yo yo konn bay
You know who I am.
You know I've heard you talk about it.
Remenki n api remenki n api remenki n api remenki n api remenki n api remenki n api remenki n api remenki n api remenki n api remenki n api remenki n api remenki n api remenki n api remenki n api
I don't know what marriage is.
Good things to do with your milk.
I put on a clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's clerk's cler
I don't want to serve the people I've set out to serve.
No, if you're wearing creams, bottles, bottles, if you're wearing so much of this stuff, what are you doing?
A bottle trap is a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap, a trap.
I don't know what else I'm going to do, but I'm going to go back to my old clothes and fall in love with you.
Or I'll go and fall.
There is no new generation again.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do anything else.
I don't want to lose weight and fall.
or falling and falling.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
3 z zón yo.
I know Kleven gwoason and Gwòg
We don't know that everyone knows.
I don't have anything to do with cleven so an epi for you to relay.
I'm going to release a.
If you think about it, I'll take a look at it.
On the things I know how to do, too, I know how to do them.
I know how to meditate on it.
I'm going to think about it, and I'm going to think about it.
Yo genyè yo rele rele l.
Don't have a cocktail.
I don't know if you know the name.
or other baked goods.
Li fwon limaj
I'm going to try to do everything I can to get you to understand me.
If you ask me if I'm going to make a move, I'm going to call you.
This is a book.
If the foundation is standing and someone is doing more than what I'm doing, then you're going to have to pay for it.
There's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
It's all in your head.
Now we're going to try to do the same thing.
Tell them what to do and how to do it.
I've been waiting for you to come back.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
They're in your age group.
I'm going to change my clothes and I'm going to be fine.
So much so that they are decomposed.
It is a decomposed compound.
There is no such thing as a man without a man.
They don't know how I'm going to do it.
It's not easy being gay.
When a man makes a salad with a bottle in front of him.
Onan onti yon mann tan konn ka ret
For the rest of the day I know what I'm doing.
I'm going to do the lap.
You've got a lot on your plate.
I'm going to drink.
tansanthan l ap pran
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
I'm not sure if I'm going to take it.
Take a look at the front of the house.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
If I go on a date with someone else, I'm going to live on the ranch for the rest of my life.
I'm mad as hell again.
It's not like I'm going to be able to make a living off of it.
Eat the order of jen again yo Kadin L Mache
Simon is a good example of this.
It fell to the ground and made it a waterfall.
Or do it in a way that you can.
or vide l. or vide l.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
They see the earth as a place for man to be in his own self and to live a good life to the fullest.
They may or may not be able to afford it.
Li vidye will all be there.
It's hard to believe that you're still here.
Anyone can fall.
Se klewe anmen.
I'm trying to get rid of some of the angels in my life.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it to the next level.
Even if we don't have the power to make people happy, we can't make people happy.
The people on top of the gen order chon chon w ka di san ko o sou
I can tell you what I'm talking about.
While there is no one who plays so much as you do not know anything about it.
One of them is a man.
They know how to use words and phrases.
On the other hand, there are good words.
On the other hand, there is no such thing as a free lunch.
This is also the mantal.
You're not going to be able to get to the bottom of it.
This is what happened in Toub Bontal.
I'm sure you'll be able to get a good answer.
People are crazy, they are crazy, they answer.
It's not just the people in the world.
You don't know what's going on.
It's hard to believe that you're the only one who's ever done this kind of thing.
There's no denying that he's a great man who can make a difference.
If you're a young person, you're a very young person.
If you are a young person.
Men who are not good enough for a big man, for example, are not good enough for a big man.
It's time to move on.
or make or route
We're on our way.
It's not like you're at home.
It's important to know what you're doing when you're at home.
They are not on the road.
Finish or Pwonk li a
Win or lose.
The end of a person's life.
Keep your hands to yourself as long as I'm there.
I know a few things about myself.
So, what do you want me to say?
Do good people know what they're doing?
They've lost their hair very quickly.
That's why there's only one person left.
So the same thing can be taken the same way or ordered to be done.
I've been defeated and I've lost the convoy.
Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li, Li,
Yes, Gonseride, the one who makes you feel bad, the one who makes you feel bad, the one who makes you feel bad.
For example, a man who drinks too much too much can only drink wine.
It's not enough to drink.
There are so many of them.
They won't be able to read it.
Li wa chonjou te demon bay thus rimen
It's a little bit of a plastic.
Tonk men know what they're doing.
Don't drink and drink because you're rapping like you're driving.
It's clear that when you drink, you can't do anything that's harmful.
They're just like my dad.
Can you tell me who you are?
Or you can do it again.
Or you can't read it.
Yeah, well, how are you?
Those who do not know, who do not know, who do not know, who do not know, who do not know, who do not know, who do not know, who do not know, who do not know, who do not know, who do not know, who do not know, who do not know, who do not know, who do not know, who do not know, who do not know, who do not know.
Lord Li knows your name.
or believe in ba gen lòdi chan anko
It's the same as being uncontrollable.
They're quickly out of control.
It's a hell of a lot of fun.
Yo fin personas long can yo make what you can bring to you that you can bring to you and you can make it happen.
Or you can't drink it again.
It's not like there's a lot of people out there.
They drink explicitly.
He then drank explicitly.
What happens, for example, if someone drinks to make a change of clothes?
Yo gen davided lò sou yo, or ga mouye tètou, yo gen dwa metou kouche, or clothing desan l?
I don't think anyone can do that.
There is no such thing as a black man.
They are on the couche.
I'm going to run.
I'm going to do something about it.
I'm going to try to make it work.
The men took advantage of the coat of arms.
I'm not going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie
There is no such thing as a man's soup.
They've been here ever since.
Or you're not going to get it.
I'm either up or down.
They don't drink too much to finish or put on a couche or put on a couche or put on a canvas.
Basil and olive oil.
All the good things come to those who wait.
All the best to you.
Well, there are some things, for example, such as a compact picran that can be used to cut a piece of paper.
Li donnen yon ti bou l konsakiyen yo run mainly
I've known and loved many times since I was a child.
I know how to make love to my friends even if it's the same.
I'm going to go through the process.
It's a passing disaster.
I'm not sure where to find it.
They're at the bottom of the list.
How many of you are going to fight for the first time?
I've been wanting to do this for a while now.
Let's get to the bottom of cleven.
The gene is derived from the gene.
There's plenty of toilet water.
There's a lot of water in the bathroom.
I'm a woman.
It's women's because no one can pass a woman's decol.
I've heard of men in the women's section.
Everyone knows about women because they know.
My mom is always like this.
How do you know what's going on?
I'm married and I can't afford to lose weight.
Tomorrow morning I'm going to do the same thing.
They are always there so that they can lift them up against the sun.
I've always known people like that.
I know a person who lifts an entire fridge.
That's why I'm here to tell you that I don't care.
It's like a bird's eye view.
On the other side of the world.
I'm going to tell you a long story behind it.
There's no such thing as a bridesmaid.
It's the best thing to do.
Or you'll have to know who's going to be there for you.
Or so it seems.
I'm going to tell you how much I love you, but I'm going to tell you how much I love you, and I'm going to tell you how much I love you, and I'm going to tell you how much I love you, and I'm going to love you, and I'm going to love you, and I'm going to love you, and I'm going to love you, and I'm going to love you, and I'm going to love you, and I'm going to love you, and I'm going to love you
I'm going to do something new.
You can't change the things you want to change.
I don't know if any of these things are going to work out.
I know how to use it to sell new people.
They were born with gills.
And the glass thing I'm going to give you is the glass thing I'm going to give you.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that, but I'm sure I'm going to be able to do that.
They know what I'm talking about.
They are the only carbon that will be taken from them.
That's what I'm going to do.
Afterwards, afterwards, afterwards.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it again, but I'm not going to be able to do it again.
I'm sure they'll come out of the closet.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
I'd like to know how to interact with you.
It's not like I'm going to be able to afford it.
It's a man's world and he's a man's world.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
It's the first time I've ever heard of it.
Take Elè, for example.
I'm not going to say anything about it.
Put your carbon in the water.
Or to say goodbye, good.
On a few examples of Gon bay li take I met so li sa
I met you and I met you.
I've met a lot of people in my life.
If, for example, I don't take on a life of my own, I put on a knot, I do it.
If I'm in the mountains, I'm in the mountains.
It's the same as the one you're looking for.
w ap di Woupisa
Janman monte fò la
For example, if you're looking for a new one, you're looking for a new one.
Are you going to come to Jan?
I know you're a good man.
There are two types of men, e.g. ap benyen.
I'm going to give you a birthday present.
I can't say that again.
Good luck to you.
on rad ba la
It's the only thing people can do.
They're just like that.
I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results.
Good luck to you all.
I'm going to drink some water.
I'm glad to see you.
Rad la sou mouj
I don't know if it's yours or not.
Whether or not I passed or not.
I'm not sure if I'm ready for it.
They don't want to do anything, or they're going to want to do it.
I'm glad you're not alone anymore.
There are a lot of them.
This is because I wasn't born to be the first person to be baptized.
E or gen yon bay
I've known you before.
men or put me at home.
Dance at home or put it all together.
O konn dijan or rele sa
You're not releasing it.
He also filed for divorce.
For example, if you have a network inside of you, you can use a barrier to get in touch with your loved one.
I'm sure you'll find a lot of them.
If you're a man, I'll only wear it when I'm old.
Is there anything I can do to get out?
I've been told to leave.
I've been waiting for you all day.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
How many of you can get a new one?
If I see someone on the drive, they'll call me and drive.
A, bon, pa gen order chan yo pa di sa again.
I don't know the rat demi rat demi on ba li mete tout difounen yo
Pa gen order jan anpò rat ke jan fa y an
I'm not sure what I'm going to do next.
Anyone who wishes to win or lose can also enter the room.
I'm going to come in and get a ride.
I'm going to do a whole lot of stuff.
Anvakabon ouye since the people m macha rad chouy or soun l avan pa bon
It's a good thing to put the kids in bed or something.
They took it.
They put you in your pocket and thank you.
Well, for example, the son of a coward, will you be the first, the good, the bad?
Some people walk all the way to the river.
You will never be able to get married again.
I've got my teeth in someone's mouth.
I'm going to do everything I can.
I'm going to walk like this.
and ap with convirad chire so li tout tan mark lè
Is there another gene, you know?
Or do you say, they walk all the way, they walk all the way, they move all the way?
Who's going to put the rad on you?
I'm going to put the rad on or someone else's face.
or two gen bay sou li
What's the matter with you?
That's because I've been using it ever since.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything for you.
How long have you been here?
Who are you, who are you, and who are you clean?
Rad li clean, men, who is such a man who knows how to eat, in order to get rid of rad li?
We are faced with the same problem.
There have been a few bugs.
Even if I don't want to give a new person or anything good for you, I don't want to give it to you.
Or do you want me to end it?
I can't or won't tell you.
I'm happy I'm also good at other things.
What am I supposed to do?
Or, who knows what to eat, who knows what to eat, who doesn't know what to eat, who doesn't know what to eat.
Li ye, ba y al achapye, degare w bon mien nou one apan m needon, but i am going to be a man.
Or I'll tell you the only thing about it.
Or you're going to say the only thing I'm going to say.
The people of Akare are not open to men.
A new generation has opened up the opportunity for me.
For me, the island is a savage island.
I'm going to go through it.
I don't want to talk to you because I have too many words.
Rye or rye ahead.
There is no poverty, no mask, and no feeb.
Men bon gen srè maskay gen
Maskay gen maskarad gen
How many people are new?
They know where to look.
I'm afraid they are masquerading.
If a brother or sister is unable to get along or work out, I'm going to try to find someone who can help me.
I'm very happy.
I'm going to start all over again.
I'm going to make an order for you.
I think it's very interesting.
Keep going.
If you are someone, for example,
There is no one left.
A pair of trousers, for example.
There's nothing wrong with that.
As if I'm going to tell you.
I'm going to put them on in a pair of trousers.
One way to do good to people.
In the meantime, thank you for your work or for your service, let's answer a few questions.
For example, e.g.
I don't know who it is.
I'm in the dizon wine business.
Whether it's in a cupboard or not.
Do you have two people in the same area at once, or are you divided?
Okay, so who's going to be the pilot?
Now it's time for me to show up.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm a foreign citizen who can't afford to pass through or anyone else in the area.
I'm the son of a foreign man so you're so good at it.
We can't wait to see what's new.
mounin an w ap di
It's not about the people.
There is no other generation of a kadis again.
If you ask me if I'm going to be with someone, I'll tell you.
I don't think that's the case here.
It is owned by Jan Glòd.
I'm not the only one who's happy with it.
Appears to be the mission of Seyon.
Or do you want to know?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
Or do you need someone to give you the glory?
It's not just a matter of time.
Now you need to know.
Even if I don't have a network nearby.
I live in this area.
That's what it's all about.
There are so many people out there that I don't know who I'm living with.
The right to remain silent.
All the people who work here are living here.
So much so, that there is a lot of money to be made.
It's not a big deal.
There will be a lot of copper going on, a lot of copper going on, a lot of copper going on in the sea.
It's time for you to finish your journey and you won't be able to do it again.
I'm not going to say anything.
He could never live again.
Let's look at the law and how it can be enforced.
I'm going to tell you a great story.
Take, for example, a network where you know who you're talking to and what you're talking about.
It's the only way I'm going to be able to pick up the pieces.
It's hard to tell who's going to make it.
There are many ways to do this.
I can't tell you what to do.
It's easy to understand.
I don't want to be a good kid.
The child is in a state of shock.
I'm the only one who knows.
I'm going to fight with more.
or well in Mwen gen.
I don't even know what I'm going to do or what I'm going to do.
Use your phone.
mechanste Siman gen other things or by you too
or do no harm.
Okay, somebody's right, or I'm going to do something about it, and if they're right, they're wrong.
Mchès, if you don't know how to serve them, if you don't know how to use them again, I'm going to give you a call.
What is the man who is the only one who can regulate a person's life?
If you have an obligation to do something about it, do it, or write it down.
Or the bride-to-be can buy a new one as soon as possible.
You don't know me.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again.
Dim fo kiriyan yo rele yon moun konsan man chache poujvelle kiriyan yo rele yo
or pa gen order li again yo rele li
I want to go to the other room where I can do it.
If you ask someone to help you, they'll ask you.
Al learned something.
Or I might as well learn how to do it.
Or I'll learn how to do it myself.
It's not like you're the one who's going to have to learn it.
If you don't want to talk about it, don't worry about it.
Understand, a guy, for example, isn't even going to use you for anything.
But, if you're in the mood for something like this, what's the point?
I'm going to be a little short.
I'm going to order it again.
They're the only ones who've been there.
They are ordered in a manner that is consistent with the rules.
They are ordered in the order in which they can be ordered.
Li pa gen order of gen or di
I'm not going to tell you what happened.
Se minès yo head.
A person who has been ordered to do so will not want to be told by another person to do so again.
You are the one who has the power to change the world.
I'm going to release a
It's not like you're not going to be able to do it.
I've been waiting a few minutes for you.
That's why I'm here.
I don't know what I'm going to do with anything.
They're in love with each other.
They're going to be able to do it.
I don't even know anything about it.
I can do it now or I can do it again.
They're not the only ones here.
This is what they say.
They're here.
Or do you think there's something wrong with that?
On the one hand, it's about a person who's going to make a mistake, and on the other hand, it's about a person who's going to make a mistake.
Even if you don't want me to do something about it, I can't hear you anymore.
I know you're a non-baby, I know you're a non-baby.
How do you know who you are?
And then there's the whole thing.
The first person to pass the plunge is going to put a bay on a plateau.
If you're going to make a mistake, you're going to make a mistake.
There is no such thing as an order of magnitude, and I don't know what to say.
They know a little bit about it.
I'm going to win the race, how are you doing again?
Two of them are in the middle of it.
Well, if I'm going to stay that way, I'm going to do it.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
It's not easy.
I don't know who he is.
They're going to read it.
I don't know what to say.
Finon or Kon di again
The order of the gen pa order jan
They know how to make a gene work.
They've got some wine they can't make.
They're at work.
They've got a lot of work to do.
They've got their work cut out for them.
Or you can't do that anymore.
Or even if you're wearing a purse.
It's not like I'm going to make a lot of money.
I'm not going to lie.
Or is it me?
Or to make a living out of it.
a new or a new cuff.
Or do you have the right to petition?
or not to do so.
What to do or what not to do.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
Or kite li or pa or pa to kill the wolf.
If I'm going to do it again, I'm going to do it again.
I'm here to help you.
Kissing or kissing is a good thing.
Or I don't need it.
on their own.
Bon o sot pale m lade an an an thing
They're selling wine every year, they're selling wine every year.
I've been doing a few things.
Yeah, but I'm looking for you again.
I'm looking for the devil.
A person, for example, who is in possession of a stash, and then takes that thing, puts it in a coat, or another coin.
I'm going to do what I'm going to do.
They're just going to be there for you.
They can't sell.
If they don't sell it, they'll sell it.
They'll take it from you and I'll be there for you.
I'm going to kill you.
I'm going to do it.
I'm going to do this for you in the meantime.
They won't be able to sell anything.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
If the person doesn't want you to tell him I'm going to kill him.
I'm going to do it.
They won't be able to do it again.
I'm also going to be defending the men.
You're not going to do it again, you're going to do it again, you're going to do it again, you're going to do it again, you're going to do it again, you're going to do it again, you're going to do it again, you're going to do it again, you're going to do it again, you're going to do it again, you're going to do it again, you're going to do it again, you're going to do it again, you're going to do it again
I know how to take care of you and I know how to take care of you and I know how to take care of you.
Don't worry, I know what you're talking about.
It's not even close to being the end of the world.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
Don't put anything together.
Don't tell me what to do with my life.
I know that you're going to do a good job, but I'm not going to do a bad job.
I don't know if someone is so good or if I'm going to leave.
I'm going to defend you.
They don't know they're going to do it or they're going to do it.
Or a pack of grains.
Melon and pepper are mixed together so that they can be taken in the same way.
Who knows what I'm going to do?
It's the boat I'm in.
I'm not going to say it again.
Or do you know?
I know someone by example who will be there for you.
It's the last of those things I've ever seen before.
It's either a or a.
I don't think they know how to do anything.
They know how to deal with it.
They don't know where to start.
I'm sure you'll be pleased.
We are well served.
There is no good service.
If I were to get to where I am, I would do everything as well.
I'm all about everything.
I'm your friend.
He is an intelligent man who is a good son.
I'm going to tell you a good story.
They don't want to leave.
Or you don't know.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
wpa men's order are not ordered again
I don't even know who you are anymore.
Everything is fine.
I've been sick since I was born.
I have suffered a lot in my life.
I've been doing a lot of things since I was born.
Since I was born?
Or someone like that.
sa lap e bay lap
Onnonm since the birthday lap suffer lap thing
I'm not going to lie to you again, and I'm going to say goodbye.
or rad, for example.
Take it or leave it.
I'm going to take a look at what I'm doing.
It's not uncommon for someone to be born this way.
I've been waiting for you.
I'm going to take a break.
I don't know if I'm going to order it or not.
A man with one hair is a man with one hair.
Yon iceyen men
I have long hair.
We're going to have to go to Miss Bay.
I'm going to pass you by.
It's not just me.
There is no problem.
I'm going to ask you a few more questions.
A man or a woman, or a man or a woman, has a red color and a red color.
If you're a man, you're a man.
If you're a winner or a loser.
Or I'll say it again.
I'm a man and I'm a man.
I don't know how to watch you.
I've got ice cream in my pocket.
There's only one guy left.
Well, what do you mean, grill, huh?
Well, is there the same thing or is there a grill, even, or is there something?
Okay, so what if I'm a man, or a good man, or I'm not supposed to be called a man?
It's not about what people say to you.
The one who is born with the child is the one who is born with the child.
On your blanye
on men and women's well-being.
Empi devina an grimel li yo married together yo fwon children
It's the same person you're talking about.
Yon ti grimout
You've got a grimout to do.
You're going to have to wait a long time.
The team is working hard to get the job done.
Good luck to you.
If you don't have an angel, you can't say anything.
Forget about it or forget about it.
When you're not listening to me, you're not listening to me.
Okay, you're not ordering me to do it again.
To be good or even with those who want to stay the same.
It's the same story.
The sections below are about the same thing and the same belief.
Or they are in the same country.
It's the same cat.
Oh, and I know it's Katye.
The same thing happened again.
I'm going to tell you something.
Do you know where you're coming from?
If the boutken men were standing in front of the ball, would they know the ball?
I don't know what to do with myself, you know?
I'm with you now.
I'm looking forward to seeing you again.
I'm not sure if there's a woman like you in my life.
benzwen an la toujou benzwen an la toujou benzwen an la toujou benzwen an la toujou benzwen an la toujou benzwen an la toujou benzwen an la toujou benzwen an la toujou benzwen an la toujou benzwen an la toujou benzwen an la toujou benzwen an la toujou
Or you can find someone else who is not in the same section.
It's not the same thing.
It's a good idea, but it's not a bad idea.
You can't be the same person.
the same nonmen's country.
I'm not a big fan of the ball.
It's a good thing to say.
I've been around the city for a long time.
and all the balls.
I don't want to give up on you.
You've got a lot to do with the ball.
If you don't know, you don't know.
I don't even know who the other person is or who the other person is.
Or not at all.
Or they don't even know who they are.
I don't know if it's the same person.
I'm not the only one who's been there.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it myself or not, but I'm not going to be able to do it myself.
One or two people even come together.
I don't know anyone like that.
You are the one who put your soul into another's happiness.
It's the only mansion in town.
I'm going to do something about it.
I'm here to serve you.
That's what I'm doing.
I don't know how many times I've done this to you.
If you ask or you have something to say.
One or two people want to win or lose.
Men or on the beach bay la nou
Men are so bonk mamez or win sa or win too to do anything
It's the only thing that makes sense.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
Randwa can do anything.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
We can do anything we want to do.
If you have a bag of money to pay for it, you can reach it.
O randwa bay people who keep you for the rest of your life.
We're going to have to do whatever it takes.
If it were not the same thing, who would do it, throw water, etc., and forgive?
You know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
What else do you want to do?
Or do you know that the other side of the bay is still the same as the other side of the bay?
The right to draw a map leads to a casino, and the right to draw a map leads to a casino.
The map leads to or leads to a responsible person.
Napolis touk sou pa i redi papò osè
I don't know if it's apolis or papoose.
I don't know what I'm going to do with it.
If the chief, if the lapolis, if he knows why, if he does.
Well, I'm going to do it, aren't I?
Fè, chief, a ritou.
The people are the rulers, aren't they?
I'm going to do this, I'm going to do this.
Are they my people, or are they my people?
I'm going to kill you, ritou.
Okay, I'm going to throw it away.
I know who is the Chief of Police or the third-in-command.
I don't know if it's true or not.
I am now the chief of police.
It's a good thing I know Li Se or Li Se.
The ruler of the ruler is only the one who knows the name of the ruler.
I think I've heard that you're happy to be here.
Some people know each other and they don't know each other.
Even if I win, I know how to run.
The person who says I'm the happy person is the happy person.
Or even when the person says hello.
Love is the key to a good social leader's success.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it again or have a passion for what I'm doing.
It's the first time I've ever had a good one.
I don't know what I'm going to say to the men.
Li from Wle Sonsalye
He is a professor.
The chart of the order gen yo rele l tou
I don't know how to say goodbye.
or goodbye.
Hello and why?
Don't let your kids get away with it.
bayou lesan lap lap
You've lost a lot of men in the lap and you've done it again in the lap.
lap lap do lap do
mant le yo lap lap lap
The child will not be able to play the game.
I can't walk anywhere else and I can't walk on my lap.
It's time to make a decision.
It's been a while since I've been able to do that.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to do it again.
On the children's bed.
That's why I didn't do anything.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it.
I'm going to do something about it.
I'm here to help.
It's not like you're going to be able to do it.
There's nothing great about it.
How can you say that?
This is not a child.
It's not a big deal, it's a big deal.
For example, if you have a job that you want to do and you want to do it.
It's one of the things I'm going to miss.
I want to tell you about men and women, for example, on a new road.
On who ta gen lafyèl
I'm going to tell you about it.
It's the same man as the other guys.
Li pa gen lafyèv
lap pran pòz epi
It's the only thing that makes sense.
How am I supposed to do the lap?
If I'm going to do this, I'm going to do this, right?
I went to school and had a lot of friends who wanted me to do what I wanted to do.
That's the only way you're going to get it.
They need to be able to write their lessons down.
For example, if a child is not in this class, then I will not be in it, so that another class may be in it.
So, let's see what you can do.
I don't know if the child is a story anymore.
It's either doubled or doubled.
It's either m or m.
It's not your dad or dad.
It's a swap between releases.
In the kitchen.
Wap di sou t ap rele l
I'm going to tell my dad I've got a new one.
It's not because it's a problem.
I'm going to re-release lameyis la
Take it or leave it to your child to learn how to use it.
Or it seems to me that you've got it all figured out.
They're going to lose them.
They lost their men during the Battle of the Bulge.
There's no such thing as Wib.
or tan chanti
Have you ever called someone like that in a double class?
I know they are.
It's either one or the other.
All of the class I'm in is taking it.
They're making their own class.
They passed everything in class.
They've made it to the classroom.
I'm a fan of everything I've experienced in the last few years of my class.
Bon lè y ap down yo down what's the matter with the man yo down
Let's go down the road.
I'm going down the stairs.
On things I know are composed of how to make a.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it.
Maybe it's just a matter of time before I get to grade one.
They've learned a lesson and they've been able to do it again.
I've been waiting for you.
You need to know about the things you're going to do.
Now I'm going to need some help.
on something or need to know li
or wine in front of me.
So I can do something new about it.
What are you doing?
You're going to school and you're going to school.
We don't know what to do.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to do it again.
I don't know who I am.
I don't want anyone to work for me.
My men are now men.
It's not like I'm going back to the drawing board.
It's only a matter of time before it's gone.
about who you are or what's wrong with you.
Take it or leave it or I'll take it or leave it.
Yo men non aken
Empi or stand defon nan m
I'm going to ask you a question about how you're going to do this.
Now we've got a whole bunch of people on board.
The man who took me once again asked me a question.
It doesn't matter if it's true or not, it doesn't matter if it's true or not.
You're right, you're right, you're right.
It's the only thing I've ever seen before.
It's my friend who's been deployed for a while.
They never bothered anyone else to solve their problems.
I've never seen anything like this before.
I'll give you an example of what happened.
Now we're going to make tea.
Whoever is in front of you is not alone.
I don't think I need to know everything.
I didn't need it before.
The men were forced to sell their clothes.
The referee of the tribunal is the one who stands before him or her.
Or just stand in front of it.
People are pleading for help.
Is there a good or bad person to assist you?
It's the kind of thing that makes you feel good about yourself.
Riyan yo releases the people as yo
All the men riding the people with the kouk riyan yo rele rele people sa yo
It's full of legacy.
Sefa yo sa m ble ble di non e
For example, if something happens to you.
It's too late to pass.
Mal lontrivinal epi
I'm in the form of an attorney.
I'm going to have to hire a lawyer.
I'm going to ask a question about the good people in my life.
I don't want to be an assistant at the bar.
There are people who don't know what they're talking about.
There is no one to blame for this.
Who am I?
The person who is responsible for the maintenance of the reservoir is responsible for the maintenance of the reservoir.
Do you know who I am calling you?
A man who does not know what to do with his money, he does not know what to do with himself, he does not know what to do with himself, he does not know what to do with himself, he does not know what to do with himself, he does not know what to do with himself, he does not know what to do with himself, he does not know what to do with himself, he does not know what to do with himself, he does not know what to do with himself, he does not know what to do with himself, he does not know what to do with himself.
I don't know where I'm going to end up.
I don't know how I'm going to do it.
I'm going to tell you a ton of things.
It's the same as it ever was.
I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results.
Tons of people preached the gospel to them.
We're not going to make it.
A se youre.
When a person goes to court, he or she is not allowed to go to court.
I'm in the middle of a scandal.
We don't know how to be alone.
I don't know how I'm going to do it.
You're going to have to do something about it.
It's also a part of the Scandal.
It's the people's choice.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to replace it.
And that's exactly what happened.
It's not a scandal, it's a scandal.
There is no such thing as a new man.
There are other conditions under which you can make a decision.
I can't wait to see it.
A man who is not a man is a man who is not a man.
It's the only way to get people to know each other.
They don't want to move people.
Whether or not it's possible to cut yourself or not.
Men can make a move behind those who win or lose.
It's all right.
On the thing that I found when I found it again, that's how I did it.
As if I'm going to write a letter to you, I'm going to write a letter to you and I'm going to write a letter to you.
I know what I'm going to do.
I'm going to do something about it.
Therefore, if together I do not know w pa rete bay ay men gen country
This is the only way to limit the amount of bread you eat.
Or do you know if you're going to be able to do it with your bread and butter?
Or even if you don't have the right to sell when you're selling to someone or something.
Or do you know
I want to celebrate your work.
to me or to me or to you.
Or to ask or to prove men's rights.
It's hard to say who I am, but I know my brother.
Who's the brother behind this guy?
What's going on with you?
That's the way it is, isn't it?
As a gen?
The good, the good, the bad, the bad, the bad, the bad, the bad, the bad, the bad.
I don't know who he is.
This is what we are talking about in our sonchat.
I'm going to chande chatmar an
Chatmar and yo di li chatmar and yo di li chatmar and yo di li chatmar and yo di li chatmar and yo di li chatmar and yo di li chatmar and yo di li chatmar and yo di li chatmar and yo di li chatmar and yo di li chatmar and yo di li chatmar and yo di li chatmar and yo di li chatmar and yo di li chatmar and yo di li chatmar and yo di li chatmar and yo di li chatmar and yo di li
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
I'm going to have to pay for it.
A woman says she's in debt.
I don't know how to put non animals in front of me.
There are two main reasons for this.
or great sonchat.
You're going to get it again.
Li lanm straight
Nou pa gen order room again
There is no such thing as a perfect match for every man.
I've got a lot to say about that.
They are also men.
It's the order of the day, and it's the order of the day.
The gen order is generated before the release of li.
Take your money and take your money.
Or do they know?
If you're going to be able to do that, I'm going to take a look.
I'm sure you'll get used to it.
Anse chetou pa tout vèdi
It's open to the public.
It's been so long since I've seen this.
Now I'm going to call the guy and the head of the section and the jandam yo
I'm not going to tell you how much I'm going to miss you.
The order is not to release the tank.
I am a brother of the people, a brother of the people.
We know how to call you so good too.
Log on bay tirivo swal chache
If there is a casino or a man who is the head of the casino, then there is a casino that wants to give you a little money.
I'm going to write you a letter.
They're going to come to me or they're going to come to me.
Can you do it again?
Waj with a lavollis?
There's a lot more going on in the Bay Area.
Bon or nan dyskision dyskision
It's a great way to make a good wine a little more than a piece.
We are still waiting for their abolition.
E, gene indisposition.
There is no such thing as indecisiveness.
This is the most common type of tratin l.
It's a good one for me.
You've got a lot of people on your side.
That's what I'm going to do.
Don't say that again.
We know they're going to kill us.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm going to be cold, I'm going to be cold, I'm going to be cold, I'm going to be cold, I'm going to be cold, I'm going to be cold, I'm going to be cold, I'm going to be cold, I'm going to be cold, I'm going to be cold, I'm going to be cold, I'm going to be cold, I'm going to be cold, I'm going to be cold, I'm going to be cold, I'm going to be
There is no such thing as a tadem pral.
Tadèm pral fwaye or
Let's be honest with you.
I've been waiting for you to come up with something.
I am aware of the fact that I am a member of this group.
They're doing the same thing.
There are two types of people who are also affected.
So I'm not going to take them away from me, I'm going to take them away from me.
Let's see what we can do.
I didn't see it coming.
I'm going to continue to fight.
Men li bay lòt la patiyas
The other generation.
There are three pran patias because they are very close.
I don't want to see them again.
Don't let it get to you.
They do or drink until it is too late.
Two or three drinks or something.
Don't make me feel like I can't get past that person.
Whoever wins will not see it.
It's important to remember that those who have lost their lives are still alive.
I'm not a big fan of it.
They don't want to be seen by anyone who's trying to get a grip on someone who's trying to get a grip on someone who's trying to get a grip on someone who's trying to get a grip on someone who's trying to get a grip on someone who's trying to get a grip on someone who's trying to get a grip on someone who's trying to get a grip on someone who's trying to get a grip on someone who's trying to get a grip on someone else.
I killed them.
Who am I to say that I am?
I'll kill them and I'll never see them again.
Yo tiril lavi
It's not like you're going to be able to do it.
Bon sa bonn rive an rele
I don't know what I'm talking about.
They made oustan chapo
I'm going to tell you why I'm here.
Someone shows up and asks me how I feel about it.
If you're going to do something about it, you're going to do something about it.
Ask them about their children's lives.
I'm looking forward to it.
So, do they know what they're talking about?
They're on their way.
The same buses are on the way.
I sent them to you.
I will send them to you.
I'll take care of them.
I don't want to see them anymore.
I don't want to be the one who's responsible for these people.
I've heard it all over again.
There are two types of sejabou.
On the man for example, or on the man who knows nothing and is Seououd you do not know how to do it.
They have sinned against you.
They have sinned.
The order is not known.
They're making mistakes.
Do manchan, chonmè.
This is a touy gen tou sa a touy
It's a good idea to go ahead and do it again.
I'm the only one who's ever heard of it.
We've got a lot to say about it.
A man who does something for himself does not want to do it for himself.
They are the ones who are the ones who made you to live in poverty.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
You should be able to convict a person who is guilty of a felony.
They were sentenced for it.
I'm going to tell you what's going on.
I'm going to put on a new pot to do it.
I know you're an angel.
I know what you're talking about.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything about it.
I'm going to make men of it.
That's how you can make men.
If I met you, I would love to see you again.
They make wine.
about who made these men.
Why are you doing these things?
Prison, in prison, good you can't go to jail, they can't go to jail.
One of them was a prisoner.
I can work on it.
I'm going to tell you what to do.
It's all about the position.
Going things long, the guy who ponn in the men's room.
It was cut off from the coast of Avell.
Or rendwa things gen delè yo ponn pran yo pike person sa yo di yo be broadcast on kout panya
or short story again
or short-circuit.
So we don't know or we won't be able to do it again.
I'm going to take it and I'm going to take it.
I'm not going to tell you what I'm going to do.
We're not here again.
I don't know how to drive a car.
It's a great car.
I can take it and I'll take it.
Only then will the list be re-released.
You know what they say about Katye Avikal.
As soon as I wake up, I'm going to work.
Either I'm going to work or I'm going to work.
And then another day.
Question 1040: How to deal with Enit
Enk nonit e nan pwal begins Sa yo kon from heaven
It's what I'm supposed to do.
I'll tell you what I'm doing wrong, and I'll tell you what I'm doing wrong.
I'm not going to say it again.
anpou t bagla enfen
I don't know what I'm talking about.
The Italian Legislative Council has formed an alliance with the people who own everything.
They are the ones who are going to make it to Mademoiselle Ayel.
We're not going to let them get away with it.
I'm not sure who you are, but I'm sure you are.
The guy said he knew I was going to be in the car.
There's another one.
That's the only way they're going to get it.
I'm not sure where I'm going.
There's always something to be said for winning.
There's another win again.
He has won a lot of good things.
I don't think I've ever been in a church like this before.
That's how I feel right now.
It's all about the law.
I'm not mad at him.
There is no one to oppose it.
On man there is an Adam and a Kay and a Li
I don't know anything about cannabis.
Pran is now I'm la
I'm going to have a baby and I'm going to have a baby and I'm going to have a baby and I'm going to have a baby and I'm going to have a baby and I'm going to have a baby and I'm going to have a baby and I'm going to have a baby and I'm going to have a baby and I'm going to have a baby and I'm going to have a baby and I'm going to have a baby and I'm going to have a baby and I'm going to have a baby.
There are people I've met.
I'm going to meet her.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
Where I'm from, I'm with you.
who died.
In the morning and in the afternoon, I met someone like that.
The person who is going to do the things he is going to do is going to do the things he is going to do.
But, hey, if I'm going to let it happen, I'm going to wait, why?
Either you watch, or you watch, or you don't wash, before you do.
O mensout so pral, ta sa pral di la.
What's the big deal?
Se pa, an.
That's why I'm here.
Since then, people have been making wine for you.
I'll sing you a song and I'll do the same thing.
The funeral service will be held this evening.
and ap boula
I'm here to help you.
It's a wine that's been made but hasn't been recycled yet.
I'm going to release it.
It's the only thing you want to do.
When a person dies, his or her life is turned upside down.
I'm going to put this person in front of me.
I'm going to re-release it.
I know that there are other ways to get a job, but there are other ways to get a job.
I don't think there's a single person who can walk.
This is where I'm going to put it.
This is the person who put it on.
I'm not going to die.
I'm going to buy it again.
It's the same with the dead.
I'm going to put everyone on the line, and I'm going to eat them.
I don't know how to do that.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it.
I don't wear a series of things or anything.
For example, if you have a bit of tea you can raise your head.
Or am I going to be your fortune teller, or am I going to be your girlfriend?
Or I'm going to be your fortune teller, you're going to be my friend.
What will you do with your money?
It's the same strength you've got.
I'm sure you'll be able to do the same for me.
Do what will your tonmentèl
Consheride will make it easy for you to get to know someone.
I can put someone new in and out.
Will you do something new?
Well, who are you?
I'm going to pack a meal, and I'm going to do what I'm going to do.
Wivi, chak swa moun vin ni an.
And in the meantime, every day for two and a half years, I'm going to have to go back to prison.
It's about who you are.
There's a lot more to it than that.
People die or are made to die if they don't represent me.
No, no, how do you call people like you?
Yes, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there is, there
Not even with sakman legliz yo
The men in the balloon are not the same as the men in the relay.
I was called to the priesthood.
So it's the first asset in its portfolio.
Men and women with hair.
I'm going to get back to you.
I'm here to help you.
I'm going back to savann.
You can't do that.
You know if there's a whole bunch of problems.
They are also traced back to ancient times.
You're tracking your account to a bank account.
It's a great way to get away from it all.
I know what to do when you renmon people.
I'm going to tell you a story because I'm not going to tell you a story because I'm going to tell you a story because I'm going to tell you a story because I'm going to tell you a story because I'm going to tell you a story because I'm going to tell you a story because I'm going to tell you a story because I'm going to tell you a story because I'm going to tell you a story because I'm going to tell you a story because I'm going to tell you a story because I'm going to
She likes to take it easy.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you.
How long have you been doing this?
It's not like I'm going to sit down with you guys.
So who are you?
Who are you?
For example, you're cheri m ale, or a sitgen z.
Enpi la, you too.
Or you are touring men too
amen may lead me to you.
Yo parile l kabann distant Hey
on order chan kay an bakay
Are you jealous again?
Or do I call it that again?
Try to find someone with a pair of trousers in their pants.
trousers and pants.
I can't wait to see it.
Li sa korek is about the man so so it's against the portal to make the man call.
I don't have the answer to that question.
If I can say goodbye to the door, I can say goodbye.
I'm going to call you again.
I'm going to do it myself.
I'm going to make a list of them.
Whether or not I'm going to be able to get into the room, I'm not sure.
It's a great example of a guy.
It's a lot of fun.
At the end of the day, we're both in good shape.
It's a great way to get things done.
I'm going to end up supporting it with a bou bout li.
Whether it's rain or shine, the guy's doing good, or the guy's doing bad, the guy's doing bad, the guy's doing bad, the guy's doing bad.
Since then, I've been doing a lot of good work.
How do you feel about it?
There will be another one.
Or you can do it again
I don't want to work anymore.
It is not possible for a person to be able to communicate effectively or to communicate effectively with others.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it again.
I'm in the red.
For example, the genesis of an epileptic tissue can be a moment in time when it can be read and processed.
Or pass me and I'll be all right.
Understand that while you're at it, you're at it.
Men are not even new.
I don't know you.
Or, if you're wondering what's wrong with you, you're probably wondering about a whole concert.
Well, there's a lot of detail in Noutan you know how to use to make arrangements but it's not in your store.
I know how to buy a series so I know what I believe and how to do it in Ediyosyanen.
I'm going to buy it again.
I've heard a lot of stories about someone who's been on the radio for a long time.
They're wearing pants on me.
It's been so long since I've been able to pick up the slack.
Kalabela, OK, bon, o connon twal, but I don't know what to call it yeah, I'm so pissed, or do you know what?
It's the end of the world.
A long-term adult doesn't have to be conservative if they're there.
This is how many people know how to tell a story.
I'm in my pants and I'm in my pants and I'm in my pants and I'm in my pants and I'm in my pants and I'm in my pants and I'm in my pants and I'm in my pants and I'm in my pants and I'm in my pants and I'm in my pants and I'm in my pants and I'm in my pants and I'm in my pants and I'm in my pants and I'm in my pants and I'm in my pants and I'm in my pants.
How do I know how to read again?
There are many other people who know who they use to make their own trousers.
I ordered and ordered them.
I know what I'm talking about.
Kashmi Kilot again w know?
dakoun, OK, Kilot again, Polestè, Sa, Kijan or karele l, Patalon, Kijan again w pa gen lòt nou?
What is it with adults like Nontan an, Kalson an, pa gen lòt gwen an yo rele tanko?
No one else is OK, so what do you call it?
Well, old man, I don't know how to put on an anchor and how to call old man, Bouvarèz.
OK, so man, I'm going to wear a suit.
So if you're a chemist, who's going to replace you?
A guy who knows what he's wearing in his pants knows what he's wearing.
Who knows what a series is that you're going to put on, especially men and women?
I know the number of trousers you have, they don't come to the top under your feet, they're your feet.
It has come to be known as the kiss of contact and the return of the bay to the coukanson l.
I've been waiting for you to call me Koulis.
I'm finely dressed in a shirt and bay underneath the curtain.
I'm going to take it.
I put my soul into it.
How do you get rid of it?
Is there no other way?
The people who live, take their clothes off, tell them what's wrong and how to do it?
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
There's one thing that a guy needs to do before he gets to the point where he's a leaf.
I'm going to tell you how to call me.
No one is riding things.
Whoever has set foot in your house will take me away from you, and how will I return to you?
Sondal, are you still here, Pat, or are you still here?
There's a lot more to it than that.
I'm going to do this again.
The concert will be attended by people who know how to play the piano.
How do I get the best out of my life and return to Soulye?
The things people do to keep you alive when they finally put their souls into the sea are good enough to keep their souls in the sea.
What's wrong with you?
If there's something that people put in front of them that they don't know what to do with, what do they do?
Or talk to me of yes when someone who is underneath me has to come back to me.
It's the same with a female.
Recognizing the importance of a
There's a lot more to it than that.
I've known other people before.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to do it again.
I don't know if you'll be able to afford it.
I wish I knew how to call myself a soulmate and that's just the way it is.
Doing something that people know about is the only way to get to the bottom of it.
I'm going back to Vienna.
If someone goes to a store and buys you something, you know what I mean?
I can buy your soul.
I'm not sure what else to do with it.
A series of people.
I'm going to go back and re-release it.
What is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it is it, what is it is it, what is it is it, what is it is it, what is it is it, what is it is
Whoever is in my shoes, I will be where I am.
Sob mache Piyaten.
Anan, so I'm going to have to ask you again.
Obi, I praise Piyaten.
If you don't, you're not going to be able to do it.
There is no water at all, and there is no water at all.
It's only a few meters away from here.
Or make a saucepan or two epi.
It's not Paul's fault.
If you give it to me, I'll give it to you.
So, what's the point again?
It's a man's thing to do.
I said yes, but there's something else I can do.
It's not an expanse of people.
It's the only way to stop it.
For example, if you want to win or lose.
I'm going to tell you what to do if you don't want to do this.
Now you're ready to go!
I've never been able to put my soul into something that I was born into before.
I know that there is a lot more to it than that.
Bon mosa an mosa
What's your name?
How did you get there?
Good morning to you.
Good morning, I'm going to set up a can of worms and I'm going to return to the bay.
They call it the top of the line, an an an, an anpa gen lòt nou?
I can't wait to hear about it.
Okay, clean up and put your soul under the hood.
Men, on the other hand, are underneath it, but if they don't have the money to pay for it, who will they call?
Is there still a new generation?
A concert is a concert that has been going on for a long time and is going on for a long time.
What's the next big thing?
Di Ankón nò si wou gen n
There's a lot more to it than that.
If you're going to release it, you're going to have to leave.
Se Chemiz yo rele li
Or do as I say.
Fin meets with other people.
Or gwen thing or put so li an so pilot lan
I'm going to put you on.
Oh, Jipon, OK, how are you doing again, you know where you are?
Well, there are things you can put on the radio, if Brother Gon is singing you can do it yourself, even underneath you.
If you're a red boy, how do you know what's going on?
Okay, now that we know each other, how do we know each other?
Okay, or know ap march, epi de fin, la, li ap tonbo, or konbe, or keep someone for paril, how do you call that?
What kind of clothes do you wear, and how do you get rid of them?
The best thing to do is to keep it together when you get married.
Who's going to release it?
valis, pa gen lòt non?
If you're riding a bike and you're walking, you're going to have to make sure you're on the right track.
I'm going to camp in the mountains.
Don't walk too slowly.
What's the next big thing again?
Men, or the men of Badantel, an, mond akou, why do you want me to be here?
Mont, why do you keep me?
But if, for example, a little bit of an a, I'm going to take my pick, how are you going to do it?
They're taking my word for it.
This is the first time they've taken advantage of this opportunity.
The best thing I know is that I'm going to wear a tarek on a wide range of colours.
And, well, I'm not going to take it or leave it.
I'm going to take a look at it.
When Levi marries, what is the man's gift to his wife, and what is his gift to his wife?
What's the sound and what's the ears?
The people who live here are mainly for their movies.
Ghon bay y ap pass in the mouth of your mouth
I'm going to do the same thing.
I'm going to try to make it up to you.
What can I do for you?
OK, the thing is, what's up with you, what's up?
Something that you can take in white, that you can pass on to your face, when it comes out, how will it turn out?
I'm going to call an old man who's going to pass me by.
For a long time, I've had a series of pants, a series of little things I've done to get my hair back on.
Okay, so, what's the big deal?
If you're looking for a guy, you're going to win.
They're still waiting for me.
It's never like I'm going to tell you or put you at home.
Take, for example, the prologue I put on it.
Or you can't do that.
Re-release them with l.
How do you feel about it?
On which gen swaso di a la
For example, a.
The old man who planted it will be in the garden and in the field.
Do you think you're going to be able to put yourself in a position where you're not?
What else is new?
If the same thing is true in the real world, how can it be?
Chapo is a woman.
Someone who knows how to do this.
I know what you mean.
I'm going to give it to you.
It's a good idea to do it yourself.
I'm going to hit you in the head.
Pa gen order chan again
Bondore yourself  and Bondore yourself
I don't want to live here again.
You've got to be careful with yourself.
I'm going to cover your head.
The answer is good.
My grandfather was born in London.
It can be used to treat pain or discomfort.
And double your head.
They can be used for gwen or cousin sup.
Apologize to people who are not the same person.
I can't tell you everything from the same mother to the same father.
We all have a new mother and a new mother and we have a new role to play with her.
On those who make salt vini epi epi
You've got a lot of words to say.
I'm sure you'll find a way.
on other people's wine.
It's just a matter of time before I find out where I'm going.
I'm not going to make a woman mess with a man.
Okay, so what's the key to the card or not?
I'm going to make the women's mass and the men's relay.
Do you want to be able to do this, or do it, or do it to someone else?
It's not like I'm in love with you anymore.
There's a lot of people out there who don't know who they are.
What is the meaning of the word?
They're my family.
Okay, how long will you be here?
or releasing enit
There's a good deal of wine behind it.
It's not a political issue.
On your face to face on the moun
You don't even know it yet.
I can't order them again, I can't order them again.
I can't help it.
I'm sure you're all right.
Or to meet someone, for example.
They don't do it any more.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
You've got a lot of people like that.
I didn't know if I was going to make it or not.
I'm going to take this as one of the bad guys.
A year later, I'm back again.
I don't want to be a part of your game.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it or not.
I don't know how to use the code.
Or do you know how to get a Gadi sa se ti man
I'm not sure what you're talking about.
My dad's been out of town for nine months.
Salye pou ou
It's a man's pose or a man's pose.
If you want to get married and get married, you have to ask for help.
I'm going to tell you about it.
It's up to you.
Or you don't know.
I don't know what I'm going to do.
dap pal with o O repounm mi
Do you want to kiss me or do you want to kiss me?
I can't tell you what to do.
Or by ordering you to do it again.
I'm not going to be able to talk to you about it.
There's no order to order again
I ordered it again ten years later.
The Egyptian Poul Gen Yon
As if I'm going to tell you.
Or marry her on her own.
My dad is a one-hit wonder.
Whether you're a man or you're still married to a woman.
Manmanfi is a salye pou wou.
I'm very young.
It's my dad's idea.
Uncle, what kind of card do you have?
It's not my fault.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
But I won't be here today.
Yeah, well, there's a few people I'd like to talk to.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Okay, Dad, I'll tell you what I want.
That's my dad.
I'm going to tell my grandfather all right.
or salye pou ou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou or salye pou
My grandfather and grandfather were there.
Or maybe I'll have another one.
Or you can leave it alone.
It's about your grandmother.
I've never ordered or ordered it again.
This is my gwen grammarot.
There's a whole bunch of people who are going to die a long time ago and don't know who they are.
Separate from each other by the way you can eat or not eat.
There is no doubt about it and there is no doubt about it.
And why do I need them?
It's the only thing I can do for you.
If you know what I mean.
The men could not be on order again.
I can't do it for the big boys.
What can I say or do?
You can't make it easy for me.
I can't do that for my grandfather.
On the one hand, for example, the network li akouche
Children's men are doing it.
Only those who are able to put on a pair of shoes will be able to do so.
Can I say I'm free?
And, how can he do it again?
Oh, can I tell you something?
On the son of the mother or of the father, the same manmen are given to him.
It's either the same or different.
If you don't like it, you're not going to be able to do it.
If a man is the son of an eleven-year-old boy or a mother of eleven, he is a member of the family.
Salye for my mother.
I've been waiting for your mommy.
It's not just my mother.
If you don't, you're not going to be able to do it.
It's the same with your mother.
For example, who is standing by and doing what?
What are you going to do?
An an, de kim standing l.
Oh, you don't want to do that again.
Emi, you're eating too.
Men or di y ap pale
I don't know what to do with myself anymore.
Pouk ki kankou gen demoun k ap pale
Men who have sex with men or who don't have sex with men have sex with men.
That's how I got the idea.
There is no such thing as a machine.
Let's take a look at your mod chair.
I'm going to do something like this.
I'm going to do it.
on who wins
on ba a nan bouchen
I'm going to buy a bouchen.
Menzayi people k ap fili
I don't know if I'm going to be able to buy a cigarette, but I don't know if I'm going to be able to buy a cigarette.
If you smoke a cigarette, you're going to have to change the way you smoke a cigarette.
The pouse is hidden from the men.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
There's a lot more to it than that.
Gen yon kont bouki and Malis
Li ordered chan an or knew yo ka
I'm going to tell you again.
They don't order anything anymore, and they don't know what to do.
I'm so grateful to have been there for you.
Who's going to do it?
They climbed up the ladder.
We are not the only ones who can't survive.
The men made their way back to the scene.
And then there's the fact that we're not going to be able to do anything new, and that we're not going to be able to do anything new, and that we're not going to be able to do anything new, and that we're not going to be able to do anything new.
The men climbed up the ladder.
Now I can pouse outside.
I don't know what to do about it.
That's why I'm here.
Li retired the fime tab and lanen boufi
I'm going to take a new look.
They'll be able to withdraw from the room.
They made me take a cigarette.
Or when I'm outside.
Don't be afraid to ask for help.
Yole la fi men and I threw me out
I know who I am and what I am.
bay blanch yo epi epi
I know you're going to be a good man, and I know you're going to be a good man.
I'm going to release a
The only way to stop smoking is to stop smoking.
I order you not to re-release it again.
What's the matter with you?
Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, how are you?
If you're on someone's side, you're on someone else's side.
There are two people who are wearing Manba's head.
You're not the one with the card.
Men are not allowed to vote.
So up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up and up
I know where I'm going to go.
I've been up there twice.
Man or two I'm going to desanl
I don't want to lose it.
I am the voice of the people.
They said it.
I'm going to explain to you how I've always been able to understand what's going on.
What is the matter with the people who will make the ampu m turn one so that only l kadil
There is no such thing as an order that I don't know what I'm talking about.
I'm on my way back.
Take, for example, a person who knows what he or she is doing.
It's a lot of other people's stuff.
Pay for example and li sotigri Gwo maywa sa l l la
They made sotit visyòti and great lo
If you don't have the right to die, I'm going to kill you.
Now and then we'll see.
They've made it big too.
How did I know they were there?
I'm going to do it again.
I know they'll show you something I don't want to miss.
Is the same object derived from an order of what is to be derived?
It's not like I'm coming out of the closet.
Take, for example, the 74-year-old.
There is no cure for cancer.
The new revè a
Why can't you buy something?
I'm going to make a column
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do that anymore.
a column as a syllable or a win
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
There are people who drink pike.
There are people who don't drink pike.
Do or do not drink coconut milk.
I'm going to drink a pike.
We're going to drink a pike.
Don't drink too much, but while you're at it, you're still drinking too much.
I've been waiting for you to tell me what to do.
I'm going to try it again.
When I was baptized, I felt like I was going to be baptized.
Have you ever thought of something like this or done something like that before?
I'm not sure what to do.
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to use it again.
I'm going to do something about it.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm going to make a column.
Whoy men say they've got to do with the king's reliefs.
I'm going to do it all over again.
If you don't want to move, you have to move.
What's the matter with you?
If you're going to make a big deal about it, what are you going to do about it?
We are celebrating our birthdays.
The design of a column tank is the same.
Colombo is a sequel to Eat and Drink.
You're not going to be able to drink anything else.
For example:
It's as if I'm giving you the idea to do something on your birthday.
There are two episodes.
on the moun ap pase.
When someone tells you that you're having a birthday party, it's a good idea.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
It's the day of the wedding.
It's going to be a great birthday.
I'm going to be on a birthday party.
Men who don't know how to order don't give up.
It's a game to play.
I'm going to give you a nap.
I'm not sure what to do with myself.
I don't know what to order, I don't want to order again.
Sa ye tonenman mwen well no yon gen order chan an yo te can say
ordered by the commander of the army.
On the le de moun al langagè yo chak tye kob yo
It's just a matter of time before it's too late.
If you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you play, if you
"Well, what are you doing here?
Who's going to do it?
I'm a friend of the law, so what do you do?
What can I do for you?
If this man is so good, what can I do about it?
And what's up with that?
Why don't you go back to work again?
How do you know if it's going to be so bad?
I want to be a part of the people of Paris who met together to play together.
I don't think I'm going to be able to use it.
You don't understand that.
It's not uncommon to hear from people all over the country.
and ap pale de sa
I don't know if I'm going to be able to keep up with what I'm doing.
What's the matter with you?
But while I'm at it, I don't know if I'm going to make an order or not.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it or not.
It's not a bad thing, but it's a bad thing.
Bon ou connon on things
Or take the cash on the table.
Take it or leave it.
Do you know what you're talking about?
It's time to get back to where people are.
or take the decision to end the debate with the proceedings of the proceedings.
The plea is on siri debay ki pasan or well the plea to bring pale bay yo
What's wrong with you?
I'm not ordering it again.
There is no good order.
Gen order ye again gen order ye again
I'm not going to say what I'm going to say.
I can't tell you what I'm saying.
If someone on the other end of the spectrum tells you a story, you're going to tell them a story.
It's time to move on to the next chapter.
If the person comes or is santou on ti chan annuye
It's a story that's been told.
If you take one of the drinks, what do you say?
It's not just me.
or make a link to the link.
If you take one, you'll be fine.
How can I keep my hands off of you when I'm running?
It's a good thing that the tree is still there, but it's still there, and it's still there.
Or how I'm going to get back on track again.
or have good hearing.
I'm trying to figure out what's wrong with you.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know anything about it.
how or kari levise
So take your sood of a la or put your fleet there
Or you can't say anything.
I'm not.
I'm going to try to find a way.
We're not going to include them.
Now you're in my cell.
I know what I want from you.
I know what others are saying but I don't know what they're saying.
What is it?
Yo fin pran w kat, the people tyap li, bat lè li.
But I'm not going to put it on anyone else to make me take the job.
How much I put into it?
Put it together and then put it together so that you can do what you want.
You don't have to go to the bathroom.
The end result is that I'm not going to be able to do it.
Other days and nights, I'll make sure they're okay.
Take half of them now and then.
They put me in a position to win a cup of coffee.
I'm going to do it again.
They're not going to be able to do it.
It's not like they're going to come back.
They took them to the new network.
Gen game kat yo know how to make men out of winners.
There's still a long way to go before I'm done with it.
And then there's the whole game.
So, goodbye, tell me how to play the game, and how to play the game.
It's the only way to get rid of them.
It's the only way to get there.
Now again, I can be a li
I've been playing games I've heard about and I've been playing for decades now.
I'm going to tell you a story.
It's all in a decade.
The men of Bakwa Si pa baka nou
I know how to use it.
What is the name of the vegetable?
Known on the order of chwèt ou
I don't know any packages that contain you.
I'm going to go to the bathroom.
Ap things or listening to music are very important.
It is said that the victory is if there is a gen of sansi devwa and ap fè fè devwa
And the foundation devwa has to do what it does.
If you're going to make a mistake, you're going to make a mistake.
I'm going to play it by ear.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
The people are together and keep each other and things together.
I tell men, and they do, and they do, and they do.
Y ap dance men, y ap do yon, y ap do yon, y ap do a ball?
If you're going to make a ball, or if you're going to make a ball, or if you're going to make a ball, or if you're going to make a ball, or if you're going to make a ball, or if you're going to make a ball, or if you're going to make a ball, or if you're going to make a ball, or if you're going to make a ball, or if you're going to make a ball, you're going to lose.
Or you could say you're going to do a ball.
It's the right thing to do and the right thing to do.
You have the right to have a ball.
Men and women are doing the same thing.
On other kisses again yon
Are you ready to dance?
Or, too, or I'm going to dance adeya sou rem.
It's good to learn or even to learn.
I'm not sure what they're talking about.
They're on the road.
We've got a lot of credit cards.
The road card will remove the rad from the face of the person.
We're back to the drawing board again.
I can't put my finger on people's faces.
They don't like it any more than people.
There are many examples of this.
It's the first time anyone has ever done so.
men or on the order card
I don't know what to do with myself.
I can't be the only one who can.
It's not like I'm going to be able to make a living off of it.
Who doesn't have a story?
I'm going to go back to the drawing board again.
I can't stand being an ambassador.
We can sell it again and again and again and again.
The ap is a seven-letter abbreviation of the alphabet.
I want to take care of my children.
I'm going to be with you on the next boat and I'm going to do it.
I'm going to do it.
I was baptized here.
The person who can be baptized after this baptism is the person who is responsible for this baptism.
Those who have not been baptized.
On the people who do what on the people.
I'm going to play non-epic.
I'm either going to do it or I'm not going to do it.
I'm going to make a mistake.
Bon or pa card to order again
I have not yet been baptized.
The man presented himself in front of the parachute.
That's what I'm doing.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to do it.
The man quoted above, for example, is not a man.
It's like all day long talking about the things I've been doing.
I can't order it again.
I can't wait to see the movie.
Gen order ye again yo di li fò
I will not be able to make a copy of it.
Okay, let's go back to the drawing board, where I'm going to give you a lot of money.
When a man does this, he puts on his head a vowel or he puts on his head a vowel, but he doesn't say yes, how do you do that?
Yo releasing makeup, yo parile orderji again.
Obe, you will lose.
All right, let's get this over with.
And who among the patal churches of men and women of his children, how will they live in this world?
It's not just me, it's me, it's you.
If someone can't or won't share civil data, they can't.
I made you take a bag and put it together.
After all, the church is now in a state of disrepair.
I'm going to do the same thing.
The wine will be presented in front of a pot.
The month of pranz is the month of pranz good guy passes li
It's not enough to have carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
I ran all the way down the street.
And that's why I'm here at Gate Rebe.
Okou pa gen order jan wte kadis again
I don't want to talk about it anymore.
I'm going to make a living from it.
It's not my fault.
I don't want to give up on you, but I want you to pray for me.
Obe, or are you singing too?
Okay, men, can I sing the song, can I sing the song?
Do you want to know what's going on?
I don't know what I'm going to do with it.
I'm going to sing it.
I'm not sure what to say.
I don't know if I can sing a song.
sing or sing.
She sang the video.
It's not like men don't want to talk about it.
As they enter, they are the same person.
Those who feel the goodness of the times know that they have a reason to be thankful.
Kilod Dances again
Do you know how to dance again?
What kind of dance do you know?
Count Dans, Dans Ankò w you know?
Yo, menme too packet of water a barrel of lanvi, or granjevi yo, ladel.
Men are more likely to know.
Yo se dans adult Nonton a
Now we have a man who knows how to dance.
Do you or do you not know me?
I don't know.
A guy who can dance and do things for you, I don't know.
How could the elephants have sex with men, and if they had all died, would they have been able to have sex with one another?
Here's an example.
Keep an eye out for examples.
There's a lot of other guys out there.
They're happy to be here.
They know how to dance well if you're a good dancer.
I love things I don't know or can't say.
Or you don't need to see Li.
The guys made him stand in the middle of a bunch of madegroes.
You are the only one who can do it.
That's what I'm saying and I'm going to do it.
I'm sorry, but if you don't know how to speak my language, who are you going to call?
How long do you have to wait for me, how long do you have to wait for me, how long do you have to wait for me, how long do you have to wait for me, how long do you have to wait for me, how long do you have to wait for me, how long do you have to wait for me, how long do you have to wait for me, how long do you have to wait for me, how long do you have to wait for me, how long do you have to wait for me?
from the sea.
They make a ton of noise.
Li yon big bayis yo pranye or gen dwan kase tèt ou
Someone who knows how to take a breath of fresh air for an epileptic epiphany.
Konn gen something in the phone box non lye
The phones that make them stand out.
The men of the village have been arrested and charged with murder.
I'm sure you'll be able to keep your breath.
There is no such thing as an instrumental player.
I'm going to take you back to the drawing board.
It's not like that, it's like that.
Everything is fried and I reyab jouye yo Sa yo yo wey
What's the matter with you, Dan?
If you're going to beat Tanbu, how are you going to beat him?
I'm here to help you.
You know the game Mwen ap bat Tanbyen yo call yo
It's the same with all the other men.
We've got a bunch of kids who've got to stand up and be counted.
You've got a lot to do with it.
Yo sa y ap play la
I don't know if I can play anything else.
The guys are playing in the middle of the field.
At the end of the day, there are people who stand up for themselves.
It's time for you to make choute tat.
They're on a plane and they're on a plane.
I'm going to be able to get through the whole thing.
I'm going to tell you what to do and I'm going to tell you what to do.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm going to buy L...
That's just the way I am.
That's the only way I know it's OK.
They're going to have to go through all of this.
I'm thankful for the help I've given you, and I'm so grateful for your help.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I don't know what to do with myself.
There is no way to stop the flow of water.
and ap bay short pi a
For example, there is always a line in front of you.
You know how I feel when I'm singing to you.
It's the only thing I can say.
I'm not going to let you down.
There's a lot of things I've learned that I don't want to do for my family.
How do you go about releasing it?
Do I have to work hard or do I have to work hard?
What's the deal?
How do I know who I'm going to be?
The genome can be found in the genome.
I'm going to tell you something.
Take, for example, a two-way street.
How do you know how to feed your animals?
No, the milk, the cock quality.
Okay, do your job, guys.
You don't know what I'm going to call the Coca-Cola Deras.
It's time to get back to you.
I'm not sure I want to go.
It's a bit of a waste of time.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
I don't know what to do with men.
It's the only way they're going to make it to the next level.
Empil lap goumen
It's important to give them the benefit of the doubt that they don't want to lose weight.
He's got a way with you.
I'm going to tell you how much I'm going to be able to get out of it after three weeks.
As if they didn't want to go out again, I'll do it again.
Or I'm running away from them.
I'll be there for you.
I don't know what to do and I don't care.
I don't know if your teeth are okay.
Good things come to those who wait.
They know how to use the appliances.
I can't think of anything else.
For example, yo chita y ap ee ee ee
Fijan yo te karele sa yo karele yo bonet konras kokko is designed only for the potatoes themselves
We don't know who you are, but we do know who you are.
What's the deal with you?
E rele yo kok bon as e re
I'm the only person who knows how to read.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I know how you feel about it.
Pa gen order jen ankoyè yo rele yo
There is no such thing as a Venezuelan cook.
Whoever keeps the ball in his lap now.
They made me take a bath.
I'm going to start the fight and I'm going to start the fight.
Do you want me to tell you the truth?
I'm going to leave you alone.
How much do you want to eat?
That's why I said yes, that's why I said so.
I'm going to be 17 years old.
Zion will never be the same again.
Take a look at them.
They're a short-lived fan of sepan.
I know I can do it again.
I can't wait to get back to you.
The demon is in the cockpit.
Kla bat, en pi gen a mouchette all the coob se se men, so they can go to can consan.
Yob yo vin nan men, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe, owe
There is a series of people who are going to be a part of it.
Yo gen dwa bay yeah
Why do you think you're going to die?
It's the only thing I can do for you.
I don't know what to say or what to say.
I'm going to tell you a story.
An kosyon an pa bon
kosyon an bon tri kosyon an bon tri kosyon
Or am I going to say goodbye to you?
Li bon, an, or kreze bre, dakò è è or fini, schizze bre, kosye or an pa bon.
Okay, so it's not like I'm going to call kosye an.
No, if that's the way it is, it's called kosye an.
For those who pass through to enter the gate, the man standing in front of us, how can you call?
I cut it off as quickly as I could, and I cut it off as quickly as I could.
Yo cut yo by decree
It's a long way to the top, and it's a long way to the bottom.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again.
I don't want to know how you feel about me and how you feel about me.
It's a short walk away.
There's no such thing as a short story.
This way, the relay can be reduced to a single cell in the bay.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it to the next level.
I'm going to make the cell short.
Well, yeah, or can I order you to play it again?
If so, can you give me a pair of glasses?
What do you do when you go to the bathroom, and what do you do when you go to the bathroom?
If one thing is too big to fail, and another is too big to fail, what is it?
I'm not going to say anything.
This can lead to a right dejanche li.
Just kill and kill and kill and kill and kill and kill and kill and kill and kill and kill and kill and kill and kill.
When someone makes you want to take it.
I know how to cook.
I'm going to tell you a story about other people's lives.
He can put on his cock.
The other is taken.
The others won.
If I win, I win.
Wi men, I'm going to call him back.
Obe, they've got you for l.
An pou l, degaje or wè sou rach, vandi genyen yo rele sa.
Obe, take it or leave it.
I am the one who has taken the fistiba and the rezwazo Salchè!
I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, I sin, and I will
It's just you and me.
I can't stop you.
I don't know yet.
I know I'm going to have to cut my hair for the beast.
If a man or a woman drinks wine and drinks it, it makes them feel as if they're drinking it.
Who are you and who are you coming from?
It is possible for them to go from one side to the other.
And if I, and if I, and if I, and if I, and all that is behind this man, are going to do it, how will we do it?
Ap chache men, have you been ordered not to know what to do?
When will you be able to do it, or will you not be able to do it?
I'm also a comedian.
People who are made of stuff like a child's car can use it to pick up animals.
I'm going to put this on my face.
I have seen L...
Are you beautiful?
Even if you can't do that, you can't get rid of the new animal.
Gen pou yo kwape bet
I'm going to take some of them.
There's a lot of people out there who don't have enough time to send you a message.
How did you get there?
How do you know what to do with Enit?
Or we don't know.
I don't know if I'm going to win or not, but I don't know if I'm going to win or not.
They know how to play the game.
I don't know why I didn't say that.
Okiepe good men sa l gen sou li li a on t ap account an
It's about something you don't know how to do, and it's about something you don't know how to do.
You know I've got a lot of money.
A person can live in a place where they live.
A few days later, I was able to tell the story of the men who came up with the idea for the book.
Yo le yo kont pri men how an an
How can I tell you?
Open an account with the general public.
It's not a bad thing to eat your own food.
There are two main reasons for this.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
I'm going to have to get my hands on it.
I've always been fascinated by the physics of men.
I'm not sure if it's a good idea.
Where else can I find the answer?
I don't drink regularly, and I don't drink as much as anyone else.
And then I ran and put a rope underneath it.
I put a collar under the bed.
What are you doing?
Whether it's playing games, men's games, gen pataj kouch?
Do you want to go back to the drawing board, and do you want to go back to the drawing board?
The concert is a game, the people are going to do it.
Or at the very least.
I don't know who I'm talking to, but I don't know who I'm talking to.
Who's going to celebrate it?
Or can you know that?
I don't know anything about Relibe.
Relibe Timoun likes to bring his uncle to his place where he wants to go.
It's loaded again.
I'm in love with you and I love you so much.
I can't wait to see it.
How do you know what's going on?
I'm going to tell you three things.
I don't know if I'll ever bring anything else.
I can't wait to see it.
I'm going to take all the kids and throw them away.
The things that are made are the things that are made of everything except the ones that are made and the ones that are made.
I'm going to do the same thing for someone who can't live without me.
It's not the same thing.
I know where you're going.
The thing I'm going to do is put a bay in it and run it.
He ran all the way back to the bathroom to pick up something to do with the paint.
Their lips make them stand among the others to keep their mouths open.
I'm going to tell you something else.
In the midst of all this, I'm doing the same thing.
You know what you're going to do when you're done.
Yo gen yon seavell
Is there any chance that I can win and be re-elected?
No, no, so douse chans yo gen chance with li.
Gen yon seride bay sa yo child to contact a grave grave grave and gen yo rele yo
If you want to call me back, I'll call you all the same.
It's the same with the gravity of the gravity of the gravity of the gravity.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make the cut.
I'm going to lose my manhood.
There's no such thing as a free lunch again.
Do you know if patigason is true?
There's a lot of people out there who are going to win.
But there's a lot of salt.
It's a great way to get to know you.
I'm going to try to win a lot of games.
I'm going to be a boulpik.
It's not the same as the boulpik.
What do you call me?
By expansion or by winning, there is a beautiful, beautiful night.
One of them is the Bay of Pigs.
It looks like a little bit of a continuation of this one.
I've been waiting for you to come back.
They're still here.
I'm all about how much I've touched you, and I'm all about how much I've touched you, and I'm all about how much I've touched you, and I'm all about how much I've touched you, and I'm all about how much I've touched you, and I'm all about how much I've touched you, and I'm all about how much I've touched you, and I'm all about how much I've touched you.
I'm looking for a good one.
is jou a bon?
It's either a lie or a lie, and it's a matter of life and death.
I'm not going to say it again.
You can also apply for a visa.
You can't tell us what to do.
Now I've come to the point of directing it well so that you can understand what I'm saying.
A recent example of something that happens with British children is that they're not in a relationship.
What are they doing?
Okay, I know for a fact, I'm in such a dilemma, and the kid's in such a dilemma, so I'm going to do it.
I'm all for it.
I'm sure you'll be able to find the balance.
Don't worry, I'm the only one who can handle it.
Stress is not a bad thing.
I'm going to tell you a great story.
It's a great way to do something new.
Do it yourself or work.
It's a great way to get to know each other.
Or do I have to run?
I know how to run.
I'm going to put my foot down, I'm going to put my foot down, I'm going to put my foot down, I'm going to put my foot down, I'm going to put my foot down, I'm going to put my foot down, I'm going to put my foot down, I'm going to put my foot down, I'm going to put my foot down, I'm going to put my foot down, I'm going to put my foot down, I'm going to put my foot down, I'm going to put
A good one, all right.
The penitence of the penitents is also the penance of the penitents.
A game, for example, is a package of people.
I'm not going to lie to you.
Those who have sent me in your name are after me.
I don't know what to do about it yet.
I'm playing a game of cat and mouse.
What do you call it?
You have a new tattoo.
Or a pack of them.
Is there anyone who can take it?
They're on your domain.
Or how do you feel about it?
I'm with you.
It's really new.
I don't think I'm going to be able to do it this way.
Are you sure you don't want to do it again?
Is it because we know each other again, or because we don't know each other anymore?
Do you want to order it again or do you want to do it again?
Obe yon kadibal lanès.
Dapte potestan, if it is salted, will it be salted?
When the church stood there, I knew there was a voice.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to keep my head up or not.
or as or as t ap bat even or la
I don't know whether or not I'm going to guess it myself.
Now, this is your church, so that I may have a blow to the head, I will give you a speech, and you will be relieved.
Lòdi chan yo called yo too.
OUkadi is a bay.
E, or for real?
You're right, you're right.
An, men, or where is the bag yo met nan batou katou a, sa w di la?
An, yo di, or call I konsayi chi?
How do you know when you're going to be able to do it again?
Some people, for example, go to church to do something about it.
It's not like we don't know what's going on.
So, for example, I'm going to tell you about something or what I'm going to do with it.
That's right, depending on where you're going to go, right?
Now that I'm going to church, am I going to be an assistant?
A service, a service that is only available to you, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service, a service,
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to convert.
I can live with a crew.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
If he's going to cry, or if he's going to cry, or if he's going to cry, or if he's going to help you?
I've only got one mantle.
Or will you or will you or will you be an assistant?
M ap siste, laverès.
I know what you're talking about.
It's not like we're going to have a new boat.
legliz a then legliz a then legliz a then legliz a then legliz a then legliz a then legliz a then legliz a then legliz a then legliz a then legliz a then legliz a then legliz a then legliz a then legliz a then legliz a then legliz a then legliz a then legliz a then legliz a then legliz a then legliz a
Let's get out of here and get people to put on their shoes.
You are a faithful servant of the king in the ears of the people.
or m.
Or do something like that.
Or by someone who knows.
I'm going to tell you what happened.
It's not so much about the genome as it is about the genome.
I'm not a genius.
Where is the code for a communion?
Don't stand in the way of communion because I'm doing what I'm supposed to do.
I confess I confess I'm in love with the person I'm talking about.
What do you think of it?
I can't even begin to confess what I've been told.
After finishing, they drank so badly that they couldn't afford it.
They're not going to let you down.
A person who knows how to wear or dress in a red dress code will be able to do so.
It's not like it's too hot or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold or too cold.
Priyal is very proud of him.
There are many ways to do this.
Riyan rele yo sakrispe nan sa k konn gen tere bouwi sou yo yo and anblanch la si ap sing a pe a
riyan rele l
A woman is a redhead.
I'm going to sacrifice it.
Have a nice ride to the party.
Do you want to celebrate your birthday more than anything else?
Are you ready for a party in this area?
It is now part of the Eee Okavayon sub-region.
Mr. Kabyayi, are you going to take your debts against you, or am I going to do it?
Anyone who is willing to do the work can get people to kill pigs or have them all on their own account.
Li gen an yo call people like you.
I'm still in the middle of it.
There's no other way I'm going to be able to do it again.
I'm going to get silver again.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again.
I'm going to do it again.
I'm not sure who I am.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it myself, but I'm not going to be able to do it myself.
or m grand kont mete or kouche konmyen jou a
What's wrong with you?
Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, what the hell is that?
It can't be any worse.
What, for example, is a good response to service or would you like to give it to me and give it to me?
What can you do about it?
I don't know who's going up there, but how do you know what's going on?
That's why I told you I knew what to do.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
What's up with that?
If it's up to you, why don't you?
Se desentes priye even
I'm going to tell you about it, and I'm going to tell you about it, and I'm going to tell you about it, and I'm going to tell you about it, and I'm going to tell you about it, and I'm going to tell you about it, and I'm going to tell you about it, and I'm going to tell you about it, and I'm going to tell you about it, and I'm going to tell you about it, and I'm going to tell you about it.
It's good to know how many children there are, for example.
Who's going to take care of you?
Who's to blame for that, then?
Do you know what to do with it?
What is the name of the person you are, or the name of a goddess?
Who's going to buy men's clothing, or who's going to call a goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn goddamn god
If it's not open, the person who knows when to know what to do with the other person, will call you.
I'm going to call Kaylwa Rimen.
If you want to get in there, you can use it.
Are you ready or not?
Why am I still here, you know?
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm going to tell you a story.
I'm ready to load again.
They were able to order again.
OR do you know what to do with the new peristalsis?
You know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
Ben Bon Dakò is here to stay.
A good thing about plants in the middle of the forest.
The men's men's teams have a chance to get back to the playoffs.
This is a peristil ungan an an
Here is a photo.
If any of the photos are of him
Everything goes by the wayside.
This is a photo of Koulin.
Or on the phone and how did you want to re-release it?
All my pictures are taken in the back of my mind.
It's a big deal to be able to do what you want to do and how you want to do it.
Now I don't know what to do with myself.
Prepa releasing you seven?
Asson, if you're going to be in the middle of something, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it, look at it.
Men or women know we're not so good.
Well, I don't know how to fix it.
You never know if you're going to be able to play seven in a ton.
Well, I don't know if you'll ever be able to play seven in a ton.
I'm going to tell you how much love my brother has for me.
Lolling back and forth, I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing, and I know what I'm doing.
and continue to do so.
I've got a new one, and I've got a new one.
I myself have a record.
It's a battle between a and a.
I myself am Bondi.
I knew I wanted to go to Scotland again.
I don't know if I'm going to make it.
I walked on a pack of bananas to fight.
The great men of Scotland.
It's the only way to make people happy with each other's happiness.
I'm looking for people.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
It's the only person I know.
I'm not sure who I'm talking about.
Some of you may not know.
And there is a great reason to say a word that Zion knows how to answer.
Do you know how to answer that question?
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you, and I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you.
I'm going to take French flour and I'm going to tell you what to do next.
It is suitable for men.
I know I'm going to do something about it.
I don't know very much.
They're looking for a quick fix.
You're going to cut into pieces.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
It's not like I'm going to die.
They're fighting.
Well, well, if you're on a horse I'll pass you by, you'll be fine.
And then there's the question of how to do it.
For the manse
There is no doubt that you are living in a place where you can do good or bad to someone and now you know who is going to call you.
That's how I re-released it.
I'm not asking anyone who knows children anymore.
They don't know what to do or how to do things themselves.
The forms presented to them are similar in appearance to each other.
Looks like on louga ou.
And, if you know what I mean, they look just like a lot of things.
Others who know it are more likely than others to do so.
Men or other nonmoun sa or ka disanble
Or not to find an anchor
I don't know if I'm going to be able to find it yet.
There are a few plenary sessions.
There is no such thing as a sword or a sword, and no such thing as a sword or a sword, and no such thing as a sword, and no such thing as a sword, and no such thing as a sword, no such thing as a sword, no such thing as a sword, no such thing as a sword, no such thing as a sword, no such thing as a sword, no such thing as a sword, no such thing as a sword, no such thing as a sword, no such thing as a sword,
I'm going to re-release it.
You're the man behind the bag.
Take, for example, the guy you're talking to.
There's a lot of people out there who don't know what they're talking about.
I'm going to talk to these guys.
I know I won things about you.
I'm not sure if you're going to be able to keep up with them.
They know how to use it.
How do you know who you are?
The best way to do this is to pay someone a penny.
It's about two inches long.
You're going to die.
You're going to die.
I know that you're a great person and you're going to see the best things about me.
You know what I mean.
Or I don't know.
However, if the person is not familiar with the topic, they will not be aware of it.
We'll take a look at the details of your contact so that you don't fall asleep.
I'm going to ride people.
How do you do it at home?
I'm going to make people stronger.
There's no such thing as a human being.
Someone is someone or won't take you for granted.
I'm going to tell you what to do and I'm going to tell you what to do and I'm going to tell you what to do.
You're going to make history at home.
It's hard to believe that someone who drinks wine has a bad taste in it.
They won't take good care of you anymore.
On the eve of a grand opening, I went to the bay.
Or send a sick man or woman to read an order before he arrives.
I'm not ordering anything yet.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
What about, for example, the people you send to send sickness outside your home again?
I'm going to ask you if you can change your mind right now.
or fwon or puye epi
Or fwon ti now
We have to be on the lookout for them.
Chen an vini li now i die epi
What are you doing now?
Now any other animal can now die.
Men can't tell you now.
It's a great way to get the most out of your life.
If you're ready, I'm going to put everything on the table.
In order to do so, I ordered them to do so.
Now, especially when it comes to non-men or the genus Plat Bòisi.
Plate Paul la ga gen pi or take chak or put yo in place or put yo in place.
It's not just a table, it's a table.
Well, if I put it in there, how can I put it in there, then?
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
There's no such thing as, well, that's right.
The owner of the property is not the owner of the property.
I'm going to be a big fan.
But now it's too late for Donkon.
Either now or adding something to it.
Gen dwas dis or gen dwas dis.
Yon jan now
To a photo or a jan now
The man or woman can do something in front of you.
They've just eaten some tea.
There's a picture of you.
You won't be able to do it again for a few more days.
A man who walks on the street and knows how to deal with his own problems even now is a man.
The men of li jan yo rede bay yon sa yo
Can you tell me?
Be careful who you wish for.
You don't have to worry about what's going on in your life.
You've got a lot of people coming to you.
There is no longer any order.
I'm looking forward to seeing you again.
I'm going against the grain.
You can't go back to meeting someone else.
The people of the country are very proud of us.
Good morning after your trip.
It's because I know there's plenty of room for grandparents.
I'm looking forward to seeing you again.
Yeshua I have met with you.
Good for you even when you're in a relationship.
OK, for example, if someone is looking for a way to make money, they're going to have to take care of it.
I'm on my way.
Now my grandmother is looking for something great to make money off of.
Who is a gen
It's good for you.
People like to take one.
I don't know how to do that.
I don't know what kind of person you're taking.
Now that you've got it, you've got it all figured out.
You're going to have to make a decision.
Only if you know or don't know anything else.
Pa konn rele bay sa yo yo Galiport
I've had a lot of fun with it.
I'm going to walk.
Or to make the pilot soorize from the air.
Or two or two or
It's either good or bad.
Onm ou n ap vini
Or you can say
The men were interviewed.
When I was born, I wanted to be able to walk.
I'm ready to go.
In the meantime, we're going to make a decision.
There is no wine.
No pre-ordered entry is required.
Okay, is there anything else you can say again?
I'm assuming that's the case.
For example, I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to do it.
It's not like I'm a human being.
It's going to come down to you.
I'm going up or down or down.
Desann is the only one who knows.
It's not a good idea.
Li gen mwen again kay yon
Or you can't do that again.
In the morning, I'm going to tell you what to do with myself, and I'm going to tell you what to do with myself.
Gen dwa wine la
They're so excited about what's going on.
I know I'm going to call it quits.
I'm going to call it quits.
On them you are kissing a kiss, and on them I am.
If they do, they'll have to wait until they're ready.
These people are the ones who are going to win.
They don't want to be punched in the face, or they don't want to be punched in the face.
Or two of them in a row.
I'm not going to do this.
When you're ready, I'm ready, I'm ready, I'm ready to go.
It's a little bit of a summary, but we're in the middle of it.
They are ranked in the rank of a female with the same rank.
There are many ways to improve your health and well-being, and there are many ways to improve your health and well-being.
That's why I'm here.
I've been trying to get them to change their minds.
I don't know how many men I've ever met with in my life.
I know what you mean by li
Don't make a big deal about releasing it.
One of the best examples of this has never been with a man.
How do you know what to do with it?
They're still there.
There is no longer any order.
I'm not looking for a second.
I don't know about Jenny.
They're not like that anymore.
Some of them are men.
They've never been in a place like this before.
They've never been to the playoffs.
I've never had sex with a man before.
It's more than a touch.
I want to be in a room with a man.
Or know who they are.
You don't know who you are.
You don't know if you're a girl.
It's a man's way of life.
I've never had anything to do with a man.
Li Kache is the only one.
Or know how to deal with it.
I'm going to release it.
They're full or something like that.
It's full of things and I'm trying to sell them to the people who sell them.
Well, let's just say you're retired and have a drink for the rest of your life.
Or a decade or so.
Well, yeah, to be honest, you don't even know who you are, well, you don't know who you are, you don't even know who you are.
It's what I'm looking for.
It's the beginning of a new beginning.
I don't know if I'm going to make my debut.
Peter and Peter ordered not to be given a tongue-in-cheek.
On the one hand, there are people who don't want to see Joenfi li.
That's how I'm going to make it easy for you.
I don't even know what I'm talking about anymore.
I don't know if I'm going to make it to Fiasato.
How do you know what's going on?
I'm going to predict when the guy's working.
You're the one who's never had anything.
pi is the first e.
How do you know if this guy is going to do the same thing to you?
If you don't want to do anything, don't waste your time trying to do something.
OK, so you're not going to tell me who this guy is?
I'm going to tell you a secret.
I've lost a lot of weight.
A man should love his wife.
It's not like there's an order of magnitude.
I don't know what to do with myself and the guys I'm with.
I know how hard it is to do such a thing.
It's like a genius or a guy.
or sou dimren san mande
Again, I can order it.
You don't know how to do it.
If you're from all over the world, I know you're from all over the world.
Take it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or nothing.
You're not going to be able to do that.
I don't know how to kill a good person and I don't know how to kill a good person.
I'm so excited to see you again.
hit or hit.
I'm going to tell you all about it.
I knew I could get a package of my wife's packages and a phone call from my mom.
I know how you're going to get there.
The men b ap yo lan
I don't want to give you orders to tell me that you don't know what you're doing.
I don't know what smongason is.
You know why I'm here.
I know I'm in it for the win.
In this case, it's more important to remember that the person who has been drinking wine and drinking wine is the person who has won the prize.
I know of others who are once again recovering from it.
I don't know what to do with myself, but all is well.
Amendments to the law have already been made.
I'm proud of the fact that I've been there.
I don't even know if I'm going to make it.
as a man.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do with everyone.
I can't wait to get back to you.
My grandmother's grandmother's grandmother is my grandmother's grandmother.
I don't even know what I'm talking about, and I don't even know what I'm talking about.
There are two ways to do this.
One person, for example, is in a position to make a decision.
It's not like you're going to be able to keep up with a lot of people.
It's hard to believe that people don't eat a lot of food.
You know who you are and who you are.
I'm your man.
I'm going to do something about it.
I don't think anyone knows.
I can't wait to get to know you.
A fish in the sea who knows how to swim or who knows how to swim.
We're not buying anything new.
I feel like I'm going to have to take a piss.
It's a good idea to take the animal to the sea.
A photo of a lat konn manjerat la yo rele la
Have you ever wondered how long a person has to wait to be born?
I don't know how to tell you why you're not going.
For the rest of the year, I'm going to postpone the payment of my debts if I can't make it.
I'm going to tell you how I feel right now.
That's why they're doing it.
I've been waiting for you to pick up some fried chickpeas and now I'm on my way to the bathroom.
It's not like that now.
And then there's something else.
What's the matter with you?
Yo la langen mifè w
I'm going to tell you about it.
I don't know how to order anything.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do that.
If you don't have the time, you'll be able to use it to your advantage.
Or believe in the gen dwe to an order
A mother and a child are not alone when they are alone.
Whether the child is taken or not is a matter of debate.
I'm a child and I don't understand.
If you are a good person, for example.
There are two children on the street!
I'm going to do the same thing.
En ben ok answit ki sa again
If you don't want to do it yourself, I'm going to do it myself.
They will see that the person or the person who is the commissioner of the two do not know about it.
Li la an w pran pde anme and de ti people are still
One of them is riding a horse.
I'm going to give you an example of someone I'd like to meet.
Either that or nothing is good enough.
If you don't want to explore or speak Spanish, you'll have to go to Spain.
It's a good thing you've been packing.
Some people may not be able to use a machete and they may not be able to use a machete.
They're going to get cold.
They're going to be passed on to someone who's unhappy or unhappy.
They are all so open.
It's a two-way street or a two-way street.
You're the one who's going to make the most of it.
What do you want me to do for you?
Who is this person?
I won't be able to see you again.
I want to know what's going on.
But now I'm a bad guy.
How many guys are standing there?
Men, who are you to say these words?
I'm going to have to find a guy who's going to rip or tear it down.
I'm not sure if this is a good idea or not.
It's not like you're going to be able to cook.
My husband or daughter is a field of truth.
I can't give you a clue.
Some of the people who have been soaked in peton salt have been soaked in peton salt and have been soaked in peton salt.
I'm going to save my life.
Don't be fooled by your school.
an koule sive w
Take the man as if he were going to die.
It's the end of an era.
I'm going to do the same thing.
In the case of lobbyists, what if they stop doing it, stop doing it?
Now, if you want to do it again, stop laughing, here, laughing.
I don't know whether or not I'm going to lobby on my behalf.
Men pa gen order chan again yo ka di ba la
What's the matter with you and your family?
Only the lobbyists.
They're in the account.
I'm going to try to make it to the top of the stairs.
For the month of December.
Abre Dezagrem an
Apetan jouwa an
You've got a lot to do with it.
I'm going to take a few minutes.
You're going to have to get rid of it.
It's going to happen to other gay people.
Souvoun lòt bay or mèt di lwe
Enven sou jwanyon nou kay vann lòt tou yo
Aktan pèvon gravò is the name of the game.
This is an example of an anpo
You're not going to be able to keep up with the hype.
They've got a lot to do with it.
I'm going to tell you a few things that I'm not sure about.
I don't know if I can see it or not.
E or gen even if I know Mwen
So, I'm going to have to do something about it.
Li konnou an pa sa rimen
They've made a promise and they're walking like this.
san louga ou ye
This is why it is so easy to lose weight.
I'm going to try to make it work again, and I'm going to try to make it work again.
I'm not going to say that I'm a Nephite or a Nephite.
He or she is even a designer gravye a
I interviewed him for the interview.
I'm going to tell you something or something.
Men or myself or anything demon thing la
It's a new thing or something.
or pa louga or
It's either that or it's that.
I'm not sure if it's true or not, but I'm sure it's true.
know or be able to relate to others.
Or you know what I'm talking about.
You know what I'm talking about.
I don't know how or why.
I'm going to do a good internship.
Or I'll accuse you of it.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to tell you.
It's not like I'm going to be the same person.
I'm going to tell you how much I'm going to miss you.
It's a good idea to pose for a good guy.
Or a series of people who work for people.
The other niggers are going to be good in the field and they're going to be good in the field.
It's been a while.
I'm going to tell you a story.
Don't give up on me.
It's hard to say if I'm going to be able to do it without my help.
Tom di Kes
You can't go to work.
I'm going to have to apologize if I don't want to do it again.
Well, if you leave a bad post, a bad post or a bad post, if you go to the garden and do it, you kill it.
Whether I sacrifice men or not, I sacrifice myself.
If not now, I'm sorry.
If there's anything I don't want to do, I'm going to do it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
O ta femme bay la ey
and re-release w.
This is why I'm here to help you.
I'm not sure if it's true.
A good man or a bad man doesn't speak in vape.
I'm the boss when I show up.
Li dou mounche afè m pa bon
It's not my fault.
I'm going to tell you why I'm here.
It's a good day to be here.
Raka di loz yon again, which is ba w, which is edev, ok.
And then there's something else.
One person, for example, is a sailor.
It's not like I'm going to be able to interact with you.
If you want to work on it.
If, for example, they do not use the same name, then they do not use the same name.
We've got two lap touches.
Let the cat touch the cat.
It's not like you're not going to touch it.
Is there only one thing you can do in my country?
And what, we're so witty, we can't do it again, we can't work, we can't do it alone?
It's all about the genesis.
or in the case of Mse a
It's been a long time coming.
I'm going to try to make it a lot easier.
I've been working in the middle of nowhere.
How good is it?
However, it is important to understand how to do this.
I want to see someone as if I don't want to see them anymore.
I don't want you to think that someone who works for me is a human being.
As if I'm going to say I'm going to stand up.
I made them stand up.
If I can do three things, I can do three things.
We're going to have to do even more than that.
Don't let anyone know what you're up to.
I'm not going to pay you for your work.
Well, your job, you're not the only one who can make it to the big leagues.
I'm going to work.
I work for you, I work for you, I work for you, I work for you, I work for you, I work for you, I work for you.
Men and women, you're the only one.
How can I get to work when I'm tired of working for nothing?
You are the people of the grain grain.
I don't know.
pou pouzen gra a
You can't say that to your child.
or work for their children.
or on the bay li epi
This guy is the same as the guy who took me to the bathroom.
I don't have any money.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
or son nonm k ap
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it.
Or something under your feet.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
and wine.
OKE good silè sa a w aliyye Alaywa l below on the foot of the soap.
If someone made a salt on a bay.
My father told me to do it.
I'm here to help you.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Or a masye
It's all about taking care of yourself, only you know what you're doing.
I don't know if I'm going to use it or not.
There's another girl in there.
How can you tell?
There are a few things I'd like to know about you.
I want to see you again.
or not to be reviewed.
Let's take the man, for example.
I want to see my dad.
I've been using it since the early morning hours and I've been using it for a long time.
There is a lot of work to be done.
I don't have time to do all the work I have to do.
It's never too late for someone like that.
Who are we?
You work, you don't order, you don't want to work, you don't want to work.
What is the meaning of the word?
Always try your best to get it right.
I don't know how to get a guy to say such a thing.
Or do you know?
I've seen a lot of guys like this before.
I don't know what to say.
I don't know about Asia.
Onnonm, for example
Or maybe I'll do something to help them.
It's not L...
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything with the balloon.
For example, if you're good, or if you're going to be bad, you're going to be bad.
The office, for example, is the place to be.
I'm so glad you're here and I'm glad you're here.
The office will be there for you.
You will be able to get a job or get a new job.
Or get a new job.
For example, you can find a job or a place to work.
Take, for example, the following:
On the thing that I'm about to fall into the hands of men.
I'm on the right track.
I don't know anything about it.
Who's the boss?
Neglijans, if they're neglijans, but I don't know who they are, I'm a beggar, I'm a beggar.
If you have a small business, but you are forced to do the work, or if you have a small business, how can you do it again?
Okay, what's the order again?
Okay, a congenital man v ap woman anything, they walk flanked by a single manki, ansan man ki sa.
They won't be able to keep up with what they're doing.
It's a good thing for everyone who works or has a job to do.
Or make your own recipe.
I don't know how I'm going to do it.
Everyone is working in a small town.
I don't know a bay like this.
I'm looking for something that I can't get enough of.
I don't know what to do or what not to do, but I'll tell you what to do.
Everything I can do or do is to make you feel good about yourself.
Donksi, what is it?
Is it a lack of money or a lack of resources?
Okay, Donksi, what's the point?
They are deficient or unable to work or are unable to work because of a new job or a previously unemployed person.
I'm going to do what's best for you.
I'm sure you've heard of it before.
They understand how to do it.
Or someone who works closely with you.
Or they work for them.
It's the only thing I've ever known.
You will see a cadet.
I'm going to tell you what happened.
dakòri an denizyans
The men are talking about me and I am talking about them.
on non wè non
They're trying to make a difference.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it to the bathroom.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do in time.
The ordering of a card is not complete.
How do you know how to make a meeting with a bunch of people?
Or better yet, we pay to create it.
Or how many people have been able to return to work since I came here?
I'm going to try to follow you now.
I'm going to have tooth decay.
The tooth can be used in a variety of ways.
on series debay
Se pa rennyan only now
There's more to it than that.
Kise sa yo konn di Eskwad
And then again.
or other gen nou anpo
or on a finite grain of wheat.
It's like having a demon in a room or someone standing there working for you.
The genesis of the le o bon pran e today se se pou
If you can't do that, you can't do that.
Ap di Jozdi is a m
Who's going to do it again?
Demen si jwontè, the voice of my concubine, if you intervene.
If you're going to have a good day, if you're going to have a good day, if you're going to have a good day, if you're going to have a good day, if you're going to have a good day, if you're going to have a good day, if you're going to have a good day, if you're going to have a bad day, if you're going to have a bad day, if you're going to have a bad day, if you're going to have a bad day, if you're going
I'm not going to lie to you or anyone else.
There's no other way to do it again.
Don't worry about it.
I don't know.
I can't tell you if it's the only person who can afford it.
It's the epithet of men I've known.
As I have done so.
I've got a good understanding of it.
The woman's face is the same as the woman's face.
But I'm not sure I understand what that means.
You have to sit down for a while, and you have to pay attention to the people, the people.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
An explanation for this is fear.
I'm going to make a mousy.
I can't think of a problem with it.
We've heard the same thing.
Today, I'm going to be in the squad with you.
I'm not a big fan of it either.
I've worked with others to help people get jobs.
All my money is in my pocket.
One of them is selling.
When I'm tired, when I'm tired, I can't do anything for you.
I'm not going to say thank you very much.
I know I'm going to have another one again.
They all do the same service.
It's time to move on to the next generation.
The inquiry will be reviewed in March.
The things that people do in Pa kouzen Zakka are known to pass through in the coast and in the river bay.
No, it's not your fault.
There is no such thing as a "grey boy" and there is no such thing as a "grey boy".
I don't know who I am.
Good luck to you.
That's how I know I'm releasing alpha ta gen dòt mwen okon
That's the only thing I can do about it.
The men's concert will be held with seven people.
I can't believe I'm doing something like this.
People who read books and know how to use soap can get away with it.
That's how it came about.
It's called bouch li touwon
I'm sure you'll find a lot of people who can't afford it.
I'm sure you'll get to know me.
In order to be able to live a better life, I have to see someone who has the ability to live a better life.
Don't worry, it's all right.
There is no new generation again.
Or you're going to make a makout.
I don't want to do this again.
I'm going to tell you something.
Good luck to you again.
It's all over the place.
It's all about the desolation.
It's time to move on to the next decade.
It's a good thing two things are different.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it myself or not, but I'm going to be able to do it myself or I'm going to be able to do it myself.
It's a new generation again.
If you're going to make your furniture, it's okay.
Do you know who I am?
I'm the only one who knows how to climb the mountain.
Some of the men who were there were chaplains.
There's no way I'm going to let you go.
Okay, here we go again.
It's either a replay or a new one.
On pants an ap fote
Take a picture of your horse on the back of it, and you'll see it in other colors.
The bag is forbidden to you, and who is it that is forbidden to you?
The man who passed by a bay of the soul as a child.
Yo bon ti bay k ap leve epi
I don't know what to do with the glass.
I'm going to call you back.
There's no other way.
I don't know.
It's like you're cutting it off and you're cutting it off and you're cutting it off and you're cutting it off and you're cutting it off and you're cutting it off and you're cutting it off and you're cutting it off and you're cutting it off and you're cutting it off and you're cutting it off and you're cutting it off and you're cutting it off and you're cutting it off and you're cutting it off.
They're not going to be able to do it.
Or I won.
Or I'll cut the gray line, li pike.
Whether or not it's true, that's for sure.
How do you know if you're going to make it?
That's the only way to call li, wi.
I'm not going back.
Men, b ap plead with him to voyin an yo relevoyin too.
This guy knows how to hold on to you so you can pass your flanch.
You can make a piece of furniture.
Or see a package that you can use to get an epi.
What is Gad's name?
You'll never be able to get a woman to die.
I'm going to call you Bagay Bòs and I'm going to tell you about your planch.
I can tell you what I'm talking about.
I won the package or I'll tell you what to do.
What's your name again?
There will be another one again Valab for you m de la
The Bonbwa made a good Chabon and hoped for a great deal of success with the release of Gaya.
The men who did this with them were from Zion.
I can't wait to get my hands on it.
Men can cut you off like this.
But I'm a big fan of you.
I've got two cuts to make.
It's all in the book.
I'll tell you what to do.
the type of carbon or carbon grain and the quality of the coal.
De chabon or te kapte la
Li Young Chabou and Se Young Chabou
I don't think so.
Fishing is good for you to catch and relay.
The good fish are great.
I love you so much.
They're not big enough.
Below is a list of some of the biggest lights.
or dim charcoal gray
or from coal.
or you dim Li chan
That's why I'm waiting.
Re-release a
It's not gay.
So know how to cut yo cut
Good or bad, I'll tell you what.
They're always on your way.
Good or bad, it's not a charcoal.
Li pa kwonn of coal
You're too young.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
That's the only way I'm going.
If I can ask you or if someone else or someone you know can also tell me one thing.
Bon bay sa
The person wearing a tea bag.
The battle of yo is underway.
I don't know what to do with myself.
You can see it on Chabon.
How do you get rid of all the bags or put on tea?
Put on all the dancers.
The men who won the relay.
I'm going to hit the ground running, and I'm going to hit the ground running, and I'm going to hit the ground running, and I'm going to hit the ground running, and I'm going to hit the ground running, and I'm going to hit the ground running, and I'm going to hit the ground running, and I'm going to hit the ground running, and I'm going to hit the ground running, and I'm going to hit the ground running, and I'm going to hit the ground running, and I'm going to
It's the first time we've seen it.
If you pose to or consak chabon an pide
The video can be viewed on brick and mortar or charcoal against other materials.
Yo di chabon an ap pita a
It's like they're having a lot of fun.
I know what I'm doing.
I don't know what to do with my phone.
If the phone rings or the riffon rings, everything is fine.
It's not like I'm getting married.
Almost everything is right to be taken for the purpose of taking coal.
Under the shade of a soda.
Wès or ta chache ka vren nootyan
I'm going to go to the bathroom and I'm going to go to the bathroom and I'm going to the bathroom and I'm going to the bathroom and I'm going to the bathroom and I'm going to the bathroom and I'm going to the bathroom and I'm going to the bathroom and I'm going to the bathroom and I'm going to the bathroom and I'm going to the bathroom and I'm going to the bathroom and I'm going to the bathroom and I'm going to
It's not the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world
It's not like I'm going to make a mistake.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
They say that because they are also a lakou d'Akon swab in
I know how to make chemizes.
It's cold outside.
men or card se yon
I don't know how cold it is.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I'm going to take your luggage and I'm going to take your luggage.
They put their hands on it and it's cold as hell.
or of the council of Filè t ap Filè
I'm going to tell you where I'm going with Phil.
I've got four of them on the road.
I'm not sure about the pike.
I'm going to have to go back to the drawing board and get back to the drawing board.
Be careful not to put things in the wrong order.
It is possible for a man to be able to do something about it.
Anmen bombmen are the things that are beneath the surface of the earth and that are beneath the surface of the earth.
When you're ready, you're ready to move on.
It's either good or bad.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it to the podium.
There's a lot more going on here.
It's like a la
On the other hand, there is a difference in the amount of data that can be collected.
That's why I'm here.
There's a new generation of dating.
I'm going to tell you two things.
Yes, I don't know how to order an envelope.
I took my file and I passed it, I knew I was going to do it.
Or create it yourself.
An, an, don't ask me to give you an order.
I'm sure you'll be able to find a way to make the most of it before you do it.
Then you can pay attention to the fact that you know how to take care of Egwi and how to re-read the fact that you know how to make a phone call.
I'm going to take it from here and I'm going to take it from there and I'm going to call you back.
Bon bin fil
This is the only way to get rid of them.
Bon letoni coffee.
The thing about being a man is that you know how to be a man, and you can be a man for yourself.
It's a great way to get to know each other.
What do you think of me?
Relax, that's the only way I can relax.
Okay, well, the thing is, who's going to sit down and take care of you, and what's the big deal?
Wey, ap pedale men to sit down, and ap pedale soul is, where am I going?
It's a machine, men.
It's all in your head.
But how can we do the same with a lot of people?
How do you work with machines and cooling?
There is no such thing as chemization.
In the end, I'm going to make sure they're wearing a shirt.
I'm not sure if it's worth it.
I'm going to pass on your car and I'm going to make the most of it.
Don li pass and machine bouk fin faire chemil la
It's cold in here.
You're not going to be able to tell me what I'm going to do.
There's nothing wrong with that.
The money is to be withdrawn from the account.
The money is withdrawn in full and can be repaid in full by the end of the month.
I'm going to take a look at the dekout.
I'm going to try to make it up to you.
It's either good or bad.
There are no men or women out there.
It's been a long time coming.
isya evokoufè l bò isya evokoufè l bò isya evokoufè l bò isya evokoufè l bò isya evokoufè l bò isya evokoufè l bò isya evokoufè l bò isya evokoufè l bò isya evokoufè l bò isya evokoufè l bò isya evokoufè l bò isya evokoufè l bò isya evokoufè l bò isya evokoufè l bò
It's the only way to make it work.
and ap houle l
I'm going to tell you a story, and I'm going to tell you a story, and I'm going to tell you a story, and I'm going to tell you a story, and I'm going to tell you a story, and I'm going to tell you a story, and I'm going to tell you a story, and I'm going to tell you a story, and I'm going to tell you a story, and I'm going to tell you a story, and I'm going to tell you a story.
I'm wearing a pair of trousers.
It's important to remember that people don't even know what they're talking about.
I know what you're talking about and what you're wearing in your pants.
It's the old pentatonic scale.
I don't want to order again.
I don't know if I'm rapping or not.
For example, I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
I know men who are so old that they can get away with it.
It's a great way to get everything out of the way.
I'll see you on the other side tomorrow.
There's no way I'm going to do this.
Nègri konn fè soulye yo gijen an rele sa a kòdonye
Don't give up on me.
We don't know how to code, and we don't know how to code.
on soulye lè
On the man ba yon code for phone soulye
The soulye is too small for li.
It's a code of conduct that's too much for me to tell you about the incident that happened in Pase Nanfòy.
So there's nothing you can do about it.
In the meantime, I'm going to take a look at what's going on in my life.
It's a good thing people know how to hold on to it, and it's such a good thing to stick to it.
I'm going to take a map and put it together, for example, I'm going to take a clove.
Let me put you on a bayay.
We are here to help you.
I'm going to do it.
The things I'm doing are the same as the ones I'm doing.
They've got a new one coming up.
And, yes, I've heard of people who are on their own.
I'm a soulmate and I'm a man of many talents.
I know that there is enough of it.
I've had enough of that.
I know enough about the club.
It's not enough to be a club.
That's how I came back.
You've got to be good at it.
I'm here to help you.
There's no other way around it again.
The things I know are the last thing I want to do for you.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
They know what to do with their lives.
on you too.
Kou pa kon nan li, okay, you want to play a little bit or you want to play a little bit, well, a little bit of a concert.
Since I know how to send your learning to buy to do your job.
You don't know what I'm talking about.
Or you know how to recruit a man who's a big fan of you.
I don't even know who's playing with a club.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it myself.
I don't know.
or two other qualities.
Okay, guys, I'm going to take a look at this for a while.
I know that there is something wrong with me and I know that I am a soldier.
When I'm gone, I'm not going to be able to do anything.
A gen release.
It's not a new phone.
I'm not going to call you guys, but I'm going to call you guys.
Even if I'm in a pocket, I'm in a pocket, and I'm in a pocket, and I'm in a pocket, and I'm in a pocket, and I'm in a pocket, and I'm in a pocket, and I'm in a pocket, and I'm in a pocket, and I'm in a pocket, and I'm in a pocket, and I'm in a pocket, and I'm in a pocket, and I'm in a pocket.
Something like this I've always put under my skin.
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to make it to England.
What do you know about the mountaineers, and what do you do about them?
I know who you are.
I'm sure you've heard of it.
It's the only way to get up.
There are no tools.
It's just a block to do everything you want to do.
Boss season, OK.
Who's going to tell you what to do, who's going to tell you what to do?
Bòspen se Bòspen yo called yo
I'm going to give you an order where I can make a pen and I'm going to give you an order.
There is no other gen nou before I call you.
I'm so excited to see what's going on.
They're in a good mood.
More and more boulanje too.
That's because you've got a lot to do.
I don't know if it's true or not.
It's because I'm not there.
men or know gen or
It's either too good to work with or too good to work with.
To do the work is to pass it on to the children.
They pass through the formations of the people and generate an abundance of resources.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm looking forward to seeing you again.
Or you can get a little bit of it.
It was just in time.
Or find them.
For example, I would cut off a title to do something for someone in the water to get rid of it.
He knows how to do mallet tourim but does not know
I can't wait to get back to you.
It's a good way to get people in the water and win the relay.
There is no one else but you.
What's going on, what's going on, what's going on?
Well, I don't know what the other one is, what color is it?
The colour and texture are different.
and color.
I can't tell you how to get through a relay.
I don't know what color it is.
I don't know how to do that anymore.
That's what I'm talking about.
Now you know what I'm talking about.
There is no doubt that they are white.
This is my grandfather.
It's a good idea to put them together.
I know how to get past the first one.
You can finish it again or put it behind you.
They make it easy for you to understand.
Blan Si pa together Try to put it together too
Or they don't want to go through a relay.
It's time to let go before it's too late.
or m color as a Zion color
It's good to put you together as a team.
Or you know how to do that.
Or how I know I can bring it to you.
I don't know who did it.
Yes, how do you know what's going on?
People don't want to be charged with a crime, and they're not going to be charged with a crime.
Charged with our money or a living.
They're sitting in the back of the pocket.
It's the first time I've ever touched a box, but I can't get it up.
There's another new generation again, and I know I'm going to give it to you.
A person, for example, who does all the work perfectly.
They don't want to be linked to anyone else.
I'm a big fan of the fact that there's a lot going on in Rijas.
There's no such thing as new.
As if I'm going to tell you.
I want it to be good if yes everything is good if Mchye or Gen
It's a good thing that someone who does something like this can get a lot of money out of it.
They can't get away with it.
If you're a man who likes to smoke cigarettes, I'll buy you a cigarette.
It's the only way to get rid of coke.
It's not just me, it's you.
Some of the glass is still there.
Liche pou w w well yo fa rele se a short guy who knows how to make canari yo know how to make krich
I don't know how to make you cry.
I'm sure you'll find a way.
I know who you are.
Who knows how to pack your bag?
Nobody knows how to make your bag.
or bakonn in yo
Bon or bakonn in my bag.
I'm not sure what's going on here.
If 1 rad or bay is shorter than or equal to 1 rad or bay is shorter than or equal to 1 rad or bay is shorter than or equal to 1 rad or bay is shorter than or equal to 1 rad or bay.
Did you get Wagou in my bag?
Nan kouti No
You can't put it in a bag or collar.
I'm in the bag, and I'm in the bag.
You can buy a pair of shoes and a pair of shoes.
It's not like I'm going back to the drawing board.
Bay or k ap farm or poule li en pi bon OK
It's going to be a hell of a lot of fun.
It's not like I'm going to let you down.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
It's not just me, it's you, it's me.
OK, but I don't want anyone else to call me that.
What's going on with the next generation?
I'm not going to say that I'm going to get a gold medal or a gold medal, but I'm going to get a gold medal, and I'm going to get a gold medal.
Dakò pa gen lòde chan yo can not release it again
O m pa kadim
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
If you don't, you're not going to get the paperwork.
Or you can chat with them again.
They're on paper.
Sen gold la san papye
It's not like things are going to get any better.
I'm pleased that you're coming.
As if I were to say that if something is a woman and if something is a woman, then something is wrong.
I'm going to buy it with li.
Don't you want to start?
Kri an yo rele bay sa again?
Okay, so I'm going to start with Gen 1.
For example, a father can talk to a baby.
Li meton things per mile and also loaded them to carry one to the side.
It's the same as the previous one.
Things I know to buy in March I know to buy in March I know to take and I know to buy in March I know to buy in March I know to buy in March I know to take and I know to buy in March I know to buy in March I know to buy in March I know to buy in March I know to buy in March I know to buy in March I know to buy in March I know to buy in March I know to buy in March I know to buy in March I know to buy in March
Who's the only one?
Mentally, I don't think I'm going to talk about anything new like being a blonde.
I've been on the bay wiki for a while now.
Or pa gen order chan again or ka rele san
I want to hear it or not.
Or a new balloon.
I can't or won't say a word.
Covered by Kay La.
Or tell men to cry so loudly.
I'm going to tell you a story.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do any of it.
In order for the new order to be born again.
I can't wait to see what you're up to.
I'm going to give you what I'm going to give you as a gift.
If you want to play football, play football.
And that's exactly what I'm doing.
There are people who do not know what they are doing.
I've been waiting for you, and I've been waiting for you.
or pra kounen
Don't tell me what to do.
Yo pa gen lain jan yo reyankan yo bay yon
I'm going to buy a goose.
I don't know what I'm going to say to you.
If you don't, you'll have to hold on to Mobi.
I'm going to tell you something.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it myself, but I'm going to be able to do it myself.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not, or if I'm going to make it or not, or if I'm going to make it or not, or if I'm going to make it or not, or if I'm going to make it or not, or if I'm going to make it or not, or if I'm going to make it or not, or if I'm going to make it or not.
One of the main characters in the series is a young man.
Bon nou pa pesyon alpilwen is the name of the game.
My mother or my mother will walk in Egypt and there will be more women in Egypt.
It's all right with me.
What can I do to help you?
Mom, uh, what's the matter with you?
Wa, or is it just a Sunday, if you're going to lie down, good, you're going to be a big man, keep a big one?
Keep up the comedy.
We're going to say we've got it all together.
It's a lot of money, but it's also a lot of money.
Almost nothing else is of interest to me.
I can't wait to get back to Seyon.
It's my mommy.
How many of you can't do that?
She's a great mommy every month.
I'm not sure what to do about it, but I'm sure it's okay.
So nice that you can say seyon
It's been a few months, mommy.
My grandmother and grandmother.
I have a lot of seliz.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do that, but I'm not going to be able to do that.
I'm very happy and happy.
There's a whole series of things that I know I can do in my life.
I know that I know how to measure.
If I know something else, people will take it for granted.
And then again.
Or they can always be on your toes.
I'm not sure what else I'm going to do.
People like to be able to make a living from it.
To finish or not to finish the other bay before I know mezirè
They're going to keep the karate mommy
There's another generation again.
I'm going to give you a break for the next few days.
It's easy to forget how good you are to Jehovah.
You're going to have a new life.
For example, I'm a person.
Or will do it now
I'm going to buy some oil for you.
Men's or Men's.
Onti lwil pou a
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
Ghon ti things blanch yo pwonn put yo
Or I'll buy a bag for myself.
It's a table or two.
on things to do with men.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
Or a half-gloss of the genus Lodi.
I'm going to tell you again.
For example, if you want to buy something, buy something.
It's a good idea to buy one.
Do I have to pay you and who will pay you?
Don't listen to me now, or listen to a long, old gal who knows how to drive.
Okay, so what do you think about releasing tanks?
That's how they're releasing them.
Tap or knock or call Boko.
Or do you know
I know Bokal or Bokal.
I know how to measure it.
Now Bokal lakad is an old man.
Don't get caught up in it.
There's no such thing as a penny.
It's not enough to measure it.
I've been looking for a painting.
This is the first time we've seen this happen.
I don't know how many people I'm talking to.
I'll tell you something later.
It's all about women.
If you are a woman, you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman and you are a woman.
Who knows what's going on?
It's not like I'm going to miss you.
I'm going to tell you a story.
If you look at it like this, you'll say: 2 milliards, okay, who'd I buy clothes for, my wife, or something?
Twelve people, for example, I take something, if not the potato, the person who has walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked, walked
It's the other way around.
When others say I'm going to do it, OK?
For example, I take an Ey yo sot fouyon patat yo metan w value la
I have met the value of men's time.
I met with other values la How many old yon releases?
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
If I'm going to pop up and put my foot in the door, I'm going to do it.
That's why I'm here.
I'm not sure if they're going to make it or not.
Okay, well then, how about we go on a five-hour drive?
You're not going to be able to do it every day.
Good order doesn't mean you can't put it in your hands.
One of the three can make senk lo or yen senk.
Five potatoes or five potatoes or two packs of them together.
Onpil potato patat pato
I'm the son of a man.
I'm not a big fan of it.
There are a lot of people out there.
If you're going to do something for me, it's for your own good.
I want to be a part of it.
It's a good one.
I'm going to get some coffee.
Or do it again.
Or show up at your dad's.
or plentas sa.
I don't care who you are, I don't care who you are, I don't care who you are, I don't care who you are, I don't care who you are, I don't care who you are, I don't care who you are, I don't care who you are, I don't care who you are, I don't care who you are.
I can't get enough of them.
I've got two goals.
Or the case.
Or you're going to have an appetite.
We are men or sod
The men are on the icon of the yon.
Something to be used or used.
men or ta bezwon ti
Or he's going to have to pay for it again.
men or ta bezwon very much
bez tawon very much
Or ban them from doing so.
Or need or need.
Among them is Jevan L.
Or need or need, but they're still so big that they can't afford it.
I can't get a grenn because it's not long ago.
I don't want to hear your voice anymore.
Doxycycline is not a drug.
It can be ordered in a generic order, or it can be ordered in a generic order.
Even if it is pastic.
There are a lot of things to mention here.
It's not a sin.
Okay, answit, or ti kras, answit, or di zim.
Or do you know how to do it?
Me or someone else's something that I really wanted.
Or they are imprisoned for taking it.
Or ask me to tell you tomorrow what I'm going to tell you.
I'm not going to take it anymore.
That's why it's there.
They are too pitiful, too pitiful to save or too pitiful to take.
Okay, or I'm not going to get married again, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
I don't know whether that person is good or bad for me, or whether I am bad for them or not.
The ban was lifted.
Doing or doing something that is not consistent with the environment or doing something that is not consistent with the environment.
Or do or take it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or
After or even before you put it on the table.
If it's not water, it's water.
I was baptized with gout.
I'm going to put some water in the kitchen and I'm going to put some water in the kitchen.
I'm going to tell you about your brother.
Is there any one who can get one who can gout or put?
If I were to count on it, I'd have to put it on the table.
An ti pati gout wi or mete ti pati
Or put on a good or a fine set so that your child will now be able to put on a good crust before they die.
I don't want to live here again.
You can't do that.
It's not the same as gout.
I don't even know.
On a number of occasions, for example.
You can't do that.
It doesn't matter who survives the death penalty.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
There's nothing wrong with that.
Or that of his grandfather.
My dad knows that every day I can bring supplies.
Or do it or want to do it on someone
I'm going to try to make a movie.
No one wants to make a new provision.
It's either a or a.
My dad is on the road.
I'm going to tell you about it.
My dad's on the road.
The problem is that there are no men or women.
To get or not to get things done.
One of the people who existed.
For example, if there is a potato, then there is a lot of potatoes.
If you don't, you're not going to be able to do it.
How many other men and women are there?
The good news is that they're not going to be able to keep up with the hype.
It's not like I'm dying.
That's why I'm here.
It's great to see someone who's a fan of running behind the wheel.
It's not like I'm going to sell anything new.
It's a great place to start.
On the man of the match who won.
There's a lot of people out there who don't know how to do it.
This is not the case with Sivayen.
I'm not a woman anymore.
When it comes down to it.
There's no such thing as a woman.
It is a place where men and women can enter the palace.
For example, if a woman is in a relationship with a man or a woman, she will be able to keep her husband in a relationship with a good man or woman.
Others have found Lebanon credye sa.
Okay, or I'll order Jan or I'll go to Lebanon again.
Well, eat or drink, but don't worry.
I'm a woman.
Women are not allowed to have sex with men.
How many good women are there?
There is a woman and a child.
If you're a good person, you're not going to kill you.
You are the father of a new woman.
Yo eye pap Van nou on a package together
Measurements can be made to measure the impact of a person's life in detail.
In order to do this, I have to make a decision.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to make it or not.
I paid for it.
They're paying for it, and they're paying for it.
I don't know what to say.
I don't want to talk about things like that anymore or I don't want to talk about things like that anymore.
That's what I'm talking about.
I'm going to walk the people who met me and give me swigir
I don't know what I'm talking about.
Se bou rad yo di, or cre, well, but I don't believe, I don't believe it is the same nonsense.
Se sa, bagad.
Okay, or I'm going to get some rivon.
It's the first pot.
It is located on the banks of the Munich River.
There is no such thing as a big snake.
You've got a lot to show for it.
It's the same thing as yours.
Or find it.
Yo pa vann the same price a
Kon ou kache yo Alèz epi
There's something about you.
It's good to be back.
Hey now that's happening now
It's been a long time coming and it's been a long time coming.
Now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now!
One man, for example.
It's important to know who you are and what you need.
Men may not be able to do it.
The medium chafou la
I'm with you on this one.
I'm going to tell you what I mean.
I'm not going to say anything.
What can I do for you?
With these words in my mouth, I will be able to speak to others, and I will be able to speak to them.
How do I get to know you?
For example, if someone is going to a party or a party.
I'm going to do a series of things and even get them in there so I can have a good time.
How do you do things that you know how to do when you do things that you don't know how to do?
I'm going to be the king.
Even if I'm not in it, I'm in it too.
Neither they nor they will enter it.
I'm going to try to find a way to make it work.
Oy men are not willing to enter the same.
I've been waiting for you.
It's not my fault.
men or pa kab divay for example
We're not interested in it.
I'm going to try to do everything I can to help you.
Don't worry, I'll be back in a decade.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
It's the only person who knows how to make a living off of it.
If a person asks or asks or asks or asks you to do something about it, you can do it.
The people of all the cars in the relay, pad pale, betis bag li an relay yo.
So men, gonseride Tibet tout tank ap anmaide ears of men, poulè hòn, vayay sa yo, yo know how to call man sa yo you.
I'm going to tell you.
The man who knows how to win and win, and the man who knows how to put on his shoes, knows how to walk, and the man who knows how to ride, knows how to ride.
I'll put you on your own, too.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
Or believe it or not.
I'm not sure if I'm going to sell it or not.
We're going to release it.
What do you think about it?
Goit weal only yo vann.
And, well, there's another thing I can say.
Don't all these men buy, how can you?
For the next hour, for a minute or two, let everyone pass.
Li laj, li understand things and other genres that come to mind against the two sides of the same coin.
It's not as if I'm going to tell you or you're going to be too long or you're going to be too busy.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
It's a great way to get back on track.
It's not just me.
The order is again generated.
Or need wine or coffee.
The men are passing through.
Or pass a bottle of wine.
We're really looking for a way to get through to the end.
It's not the same person.
A dress or a bowl.
You know you're doing the Machanpi and von Rivi men to make sure that you don't get too caught up in it.
Why do I have to call you back?
They're still here.
Two or three or three.
I was born as a chemist.
Chemen an affair like this
I was born this way.
Why do you want to re-release the kemen cut?
They don't want to be cut off.
Men may or may not know how to dance because men are born this way.
They're turning so much.
They came from a tribe.
Ankswit to your credit card.
Chemen an genya pide Oki
You're not going to be able to do it again.
If there's a lot to live on, okay, for those who need it.
Things that I know how to code, I know how to code, I know how to code, I know how to code, I know how to code, I know how to code, I know how to code, I know how to code, I know how to code, I know how to code, I know how to code, I know how to code, I know how to code.
The thing is, I'll take you from there, and the horse will come to you, and I'll give you salt.
It's a strange thing to do, even if you're grey and you're running.
The man won the man took or so dim bri dlè yo conba yon sa yo yo four nan bouch
On chwal sa yo do l la
I'm going to take a break from it.
I know how to put on your horse before I put on my own.
There is no such thing as a gene.
Putting something or putting yourself on the line to do this or that with your friends comes with something or something.
What's up with that?
If you don't know how to ride a horse, you won't know how to ride a horse.
For a mile and a half, there's nothing wrong with him.
If you're not alone, you're not going to be able to do it.
All the things I have taken together so that I can not be overwhelmed by what I am doing.
It's the only way to get rid of them.
Tonk yo di crew
You're on the team.
Or put in your mileage.
That's why I'm keeping it.
I'll keep it that way.
The bride and the groom are attached to each other.
I'm going back to where I came from.
Hold on to it or it will fall.
She is the bride of the bride.
Everything is perfect.
Good code li Li konn mete iskal rive visnan tèt e kote sèpandos e salt lan
I don't know why I'm keeping it a secret.
I'm not a bride, I'm not a bride, I'm not a bride, I'm not a bride, I'm not a bride, I'm not a bride, I'm a bride, I'm a bride, I'm a bride, I'm a bride, I'm a bride, I'm a bride, I'm a bride, I'm a bride, I'm a bride, I'm a bride, I'm a bride, I
I don't know if you're going to be able to do that.
I know how to put my fingers in your mouth.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to make it to the bathroom.
It's not like I've ever heard of it.
It's not like I'm going to make a mistake.
Chipote is what you take.
I'm going to give you something to take 2 debts and put it to you.
That's how you do it.
I'm not going to let you down.
When I say, "I'm going to go to the bathroom" or "I'm going to go to the bathroom" or "I'm going to the bathroom" or "I'm going to the bathroom" or "I'm going to the bathroom" or "I'm going to the bathroom" or "I'm going to the bathroom" or "I'm going to the bathroom" or "I'm going to the bathroom" or "I'm going to the bathroom" or "I'm going to the bath
Do you know your teeth?
and, ok, don't worry about it.
I'm not going to let you down.
Men or women or men or women or men or women or men or women or men or women or men or women or men or women or men or women or men or women or men or women or men or women or men or women or men or women or women or men or women or women or men or women or women or women or men or women or women who are women or women or women or women who are women or women or women or women who are women or women or women or women who are women or women or women are women or women or women or women who are women or women or women or women or women
If you don't know how to do it, you'll have to wait until you're sick and you'll have to give it to you.
I'm ready to give it to you now and I'm ready to eat the good stuff.
I'm going to talk to you old-fashioned or I'm going to practice.
That's why I don't know what I'm talking about.
Explain to me that you're not alone.
I can't even hear you.
to explain it to me.
So that's how youke a.
Well, if you're going to go through France, you're going to have to come up with a better solution, where you're going to have a problem.
If you want to know more about it, then you have to know more about it.
I don't understand how you're going to do it when you're done.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not, but I'm going to change my mind.
It's the only thing I want to do right now.
Yo moutan lè yo kèyis yo graje l metnan now
Or do you think it's a good idea?
I'm not going to say.
It's not just me or you.
We're not going to be able to keep up with them.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
What do you think?
Bye-bye to you!
I don't know how to order anything.
I know what I'm talking about, but I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
I don't know if that's a good thing.
It's good to know how to do it.
It's your life.
There are millions of them.
How to make things happen in the middle of the night.
You know what I mean.
You're going to have to make sure that you're going to be able to keep up with what you're doing and what you're going to be able to do.
I'm going to take a big cut and I'm going to take a big cut and I'm going to take a big one.
It's the people's choice.
There are two sides to the story.
If you don't know more about plantisyay or rele rele member
I don't know what it is.
Listen carefully to what you have to give on your journey to a little bit of a rose to give to you.
I've found a way to put it in a new lat or an anne rele.
I've done a lot of great things before, and I'm sure I'll know better.
I know how to cut to make a recipe.
I'll be right there with you.
Men don't know everything, they don't know everything, they don't know everything.
So, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you about the package.
A, edinèske, w konn plant sa a?
They're all right, so what's the big deal?
Pa ta w.
As you know, there's no other way to re-release the list.
Befèk li, or rebeye, nou, who is a Segian li, or rebeye, who is a Segian li?
Well, will you tell me what to do or what not to do, or will I tell you what to do?
If you're okay, and you're okay, and you're okay, then what can I do for you?
It's a good thing I'm not the only one who's going to make you grey or lily.
There are a lot of things I can take.
I'm going to do it with him.
It's like I'm in your shoes right now.
or pa konn non li
They made a lot of noise so I couldn't put my finger on it because I was falling.
You know who I am.
I'm going to do this with them.
I also know how to do this.
I'm going to ride the grenn tonou.
Now that you've got it all figured out, I'm going to take a look at it.
It's a good thing I'm doing the same with the relay.
It's all in the name of revenge, and it's all in the name of revenge.
Even the men are in a series of makri.
That's the way it is here.
I know how to cut my own hair now.
How do you do it or how do you do it?
Everywhere or at least a ton of two kids are going to be there in the morning and they're going to have their lunch.
That's the only way to call Renel lam.
It's the right thing to do.
Bon m several new larin pou pou
We don't know each other anymore.
The truth is, it's true.
It's a good idea for me to say goodbye.
It's good to be back.
It's the right thing to do.
I don't want to live here again.
You know how to cut a sneeze.
There's still a lot more to come.
One day I'll know.
I know I'm going to take it easy.
That's the way it is here.
Either way, I'm going to call it a day.
So you can only re-release the single.
I know what I'm talking about.
Don't worry about it because you're not going to be able to do it.
I'm going to take a look.
I'm going to take a cup of tea with you.
Or don't you know li
It's a long way down the road.
There are four releases.
But this is how you know you're going to die.
They have a mother who is not a mother.
I don't know if the gen order won't be able to re-release it again.
It's been a long time coming.
There is no one who can stop you.
It's okay to buy it again or it's over.
There's something to be said for a number.
I know how to plot in front of the door.
Gen tout kalte
It's not just white people, it's white people, it's white people, it's white people, it's white people, it's white people, it's white people, it's white people, it's white people, it's white people, it's white people, it's white people, it's white people, it's white people, it's white people, it's white people, it's white people, it's white people, it's white people, it's white people.
I'm not going to be able to get into it.
I'm going to tell you about L..
I know I'm going to do the same thing to you.
Ye zanmen l.
Yes, a man or a woman, a man or a woman, or a man or a woman, a man or a woman, a man or a woman, a man or a woman, a man or a woman, a man or a woman, a man or a woman, a woman or a woman, a man or a woman, a man or a woman, a man or a woman, a man or a woman, a man or a woman, a man or a woman, a man or a woman, a man or a woman, a man or a woman, a man or a woman, a man or
I know who you are and who you are, I know who you are, I know who you are, I know who you are, I know who you are, I know who you are, I know who you are, I know who you are, I know who you are, I know who you are, I know who you are, I know who you are.
Well, Isaac did the same thing as you did to me.
That's the only way to call me, and I know what you're talking about.
I'm with you on Zaboka.
Only in this way, Lou will be able to eat a lot of food.
This is the only way to get rid of them.
How did you get there?
Listen to me when I say goodbye to you.
The men said they were going to kill him.
Or do you know, or do you know where I'm going, or how I'm going to get there?
Do you want to make it or not?
In other words, I can't wait to get back on track again.
I'm going to the kitchen or the house or the other side of the room again.
Is there or isn't there another kachiman?
Enmen sa yo pa rele tout so tou
I'm going to tell you how much I love you, but I don't care.
This is the first time I've heard of this type of thing.
They are typical of a typizantab.
I don't know why I'm here.
There is no salt.
You know what they say.
Let's get to know each other.
It's the other way around.
Presque the same thing is done by those who are arked as men on the ground.
Other than that, there are many others.
I don't know what to do with myself anymore.
There will be another one.
I don't know if it's the right thing to do or the wrong thing to do.
Men who know how to deal with them can say they're up to the task.
Or they'll know about a relay.
I'm so excited to see you again.
One foot in the door and one foot in the door.
We've got a picture of a car and a truck and a rocket and we've got a big picture of it.
I know I'm going to make it up to you.
I'm going to plant a plant that I can't believe.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not, but I know that I'm going to make it easy for people to take care of me.
men or women in prison.
I know what it's like to live here.
There is no Christmas Eve in Gade Byen.
It's about planting and making money.
They don't have to be so big.
Be like God
It's the only way to get rid of them.
There is no other way.
Li wa koum mann great k ap fleri
It's something I know about people from the Roman Empire and the Cypriot faith.
It's the only thing I know.
I know now.
How do you get back to me?
Banned men are banned.
They banned it.
I know what they're talking about.
They know who I am now.
Li kiyan sa rele
Or do you know this?
Before you know it, I'll give you a few grandma's and a few grandma's.
So, something you know how to do or how to do right now, is to make money from it, right?
There is a lot of stuff in the world, all along the way, I know there is a lot to go on.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again, but I'm sure I'm going to be able to do it again.
No, that's not a.
Do I have the right to remain silent?
I'm going to sketch out what's going on.
We're going to have a lot of fun with it.
I'll know that you're in my shoes all the way through.
There's always something about it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
men with one m nan
But you know what I mean.
Or do you know how to cook?
Se pa bannann, se pa yon mnan you know gen twa.
Or, at the very least, a branch of a business to meet with, with, or with, other businessmen who come to call it a day.
The key is to branch, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
I'm glad you're here, and I'm glad you're here.
All work is done.
The good thing is that I know water plants.
Or know if you're going to make it or not.
I've always wanted to do this.
Here's the reward.
I don't know if this is true.
Men are more likely to be overweight or obese.
That's why I'm here.
Legim li ye
The word consonant or word consonant is used to refer to a person's name.
It's not like you're going to be able to do anything.
It's not here.
Other good qualities are similar to li.
That's the way I'm doing it.
There's no other way to know who you are.
I know that the baby knows what to say.
Many of them have been very active, especially before the foundation was established.
When a person dies, the person dies.
Men are not allowed to speak their minds.
Let's get to the bottom of it.
It's time to go to the bathroom.
It's the first time I've ever heard of it, and it's the first time I've ever heard of it.
With singing sa yo te karifer nou anti thing yo pa konn sing sa yo song sa yo like this
I'm not sure how many times I've heard of you.
It's not just me, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's me, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's me, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's me, it's me, it's me, it's me, it's me, it's me, it's me
There's something that people take for granted, and there's something you can't take for granted.
Men have a colorful thing that they know to plant too.
Yo graj La
On the other hand, it is preferable to see papay
Fwon paké is the great-great-granddaughter of the great-great-great-great-great-granddaughter.
I'm going to tell you a story.
I don't know how I'm going to do it.
I'm looking forward to seeing you again.
I don't even know who you are.
It's only a matter of time before I'm good enough to put on my grenn.
That's why there's no such thing as Ladani I've known since then.
Before you find them, you'll be fine.
I put you on so you can get you back on track.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that again.
We've got a lot of good people on our side.
Do your job for me.
Gen something like a big grenn long that knows purple.
It's not like I don't know how to blanch.
But I know what you're going to do when you're dead and gone.
I have done them well.
I know how to make legim with you.
I don't know if you know him.
How long have you been waiting for me to come to you?
Okay, pa gen lòt nou yo called sa, an?
Ra, yo called sanmo bet.
Ah, when vandredisen, those who know how to cook and brouyi li, they too wouj to cut off the triyen to the rocks.
Vandre disenmi is the name of the game.
You can cut it and put it in a salad.
There's something else I'd like to add to this salad.
Now I'm going to tell you what to do and how to do it.
I don't know about you.
It's not something that's made of glass or made of glass that's going to make you feel better.
Sa or pa gen
It's like a tomato douz!
In the meantime, the thing that I know how to do for a fever, even if the color really isn't good enough, is look good for you.
Okay, don't tell me again the good stuff, scanner.
When it comes to adult things, you know that there are many things that go wrong.
They're not going to be able to keep up with the pace.
It's okay to have another generation or a new one.
Kalalou rele rele ta
This is the last time I've heard about it.
I'm so proud of what I've accomplished in my life, and I'm so proud of what I've accomplished in my life.
Or maybe you're just trying to get into a trap.
It's a great way to get to know each other.
There are no men.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I'm going to the kitchen.
I'm going back to the kitchen and I'm going back to the kitchen again.
I'm also going to make trapped drinks with li
They've already read it.
It's not there anymore.
It's the only thing I can do about it.
I don't know if it's as big as the one that falls down often.
It's also a man's world.
I know how to take it.
Yo raerache li make you do the branch fen fen fen fen
Yo ren dwak wit on w valore
I can put your pity on me now or later.
Men don't know who they are.
Okay, so yo call li, look at that, you don't even know your eyes.
Pa gen several karite
I'm not sure what to do with my card.
Zampyl and pi can be generated.
I've been listening to this song for a long time.
Gen zanpil again and make them li li
You've got to get them in the back of the zipper.
It's a good thing you're doing well, but you can't tell me what to do.
I don't know how to make a salad.
I know now that I'm crying.
Something I know how to take.
on what to do.
I know you have a good understanding of what you're talking about.
I know what to do with you.
M pa pranmi yen do li bay la
According to the people in your area.
I'm going to ask you a question.
There's a way to make chocolate and add to it.
I know I'm an idiot.
The men also heard a packet of words in their mouths.
If ya kouche isyou are not serving avel
Forget about it so much that I know what I'm doing so I'm going to have to take a dway or a zkay or make a sandwich.
As a plant, it can be long-lived.
They made you a great-grandfather.
They won't take it easy, or they'll know how to plant it.
I can't wait to get back to you.
There is no code.
Now that I'm not alone, I'm not alone.
Now I know you can't do now a pike pike, a riyan sa a rele, rele pimen.
Bon tesyon sa i know you can do it already.
The concert featured some of the best performers I've ever seen.
However, if you want to win the series, you can also use it to your advantage.
Let's make some fresh menmi with pistachios.
I'm going to tell you a story.
You are the grandchildren and great-grandchildren of your grandchildren.
Take your sinistre, take your sinistre, so take your practice and take your man.
The reason for this is because it looks like there are no winners.
Pre or owon nou two make epistach yo
So many men are going to have grandchildren so I'm going to win and I don't know how many men are going to win.
There is no doubt that there is no French equivalent.
It's not like that anymore.
You know what I mean.
Generate something for example I'm going to cook now.
or gen dwa dekouwè
Two generations have been cut off from the rest of the world.
I'm wearing it now.
It's either good or bad.
I don't know Ann Riley.
Ap mout or photo of a m
I don't know how I'm going to do it, but I know I'm going to do it.
I was born on the same day.
Or do you know me?
Is there anything you can do about it?
Who else will ever call me again?
Well, if so, what am I supposed to do?
It's not that bad.
So, you don't know what I'm talking about?
Or after a birthday party.
I don't know what to say anymore.
I don't know what to call you.
It's the only way to do it.
Good things come to those who don't know.
The pilon can be used to build a new pillar.
What's up with that?
As a child, you'll be able to carry a load.
I can make it to the end of the race.
I am a fan of the band.
Pri an yo rele la.
How do you know if you're going to be able to get rid of it?
There's nothing new here.
On my mother's side I gave her a package of sweet potatoes.
You've got your mother's heart broken.
I've always wanted to do something like this.
You know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
I know things that I know I'm going to do for a living.
If you are a foreigner I come from nowhere to do anything else.
I can't wait to get back to the kitchen.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Pi gen ikran in which they make a white rabbit a rich flè jòd
You know what I mean.
If you have a piece of paper for the same thing, I know it's cold.
I don't know if I have any.
It's cold, and I don't know anything about it.
So that's how I'm going to re-release it.
What's up with that?
Adepou, why are you doing this?
I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results.
I don't know your account.
They've been around for a long time.
I know how to take li bon yo to wash your tears with vilè yo gen bayay yo people
I know I'm not wearing any clothes and I don't want to be with you.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do anything new.
It's the first time I've ever met a toy tablet.
I've been trapped every day I've met my pills.
It's just that I feel sorry for them.
There are two main reasons for this.
Someone who knows how to plant in front of the door.
I don't know who you are.
How do you get rid of it?
I know how to take good care of myself.
You can take it on the plant to treat it and you can take it on the water or not.
Okay, so do I know the fable or do I know it or don't I?
How do you know the fable?
Kouye, here we go again.
People don't know how to fix it.
I know how to play the game like a puddo a rimen
Do you know what it's like?
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
I'm sure you've heard of it.
They're good for cooking.
Do me a favor and I'll be fine with it.
I don't want to be directed by a man.
I don't know.
Because I'm in love with you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I love you, I
Sweetie, you don't even know how to cook, but you do like to take li santi bon and put it in your milk.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it to the next plant, but I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it to the next plant.
Look good on you if you don't know the plant.
It's a plant that makes me happy.
It's all right with me.
You know what?
Or even know you.
Forget about them.
If someone, for example, pleads for you, please.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
It's time to make a decision.
The good news is that you're not going to get caught in the middle.
This is the first time this has happened.
It's as if I'm going to tell you what I'm thinking.
I don't know if you know me or not.
I'm ready to pump, or I'm ready to pump my head.
Men like you are talking to me.
Fin expliqué I don't know if you're going to call me pompon
It's OK with men's birthdays.
Explain the meaning of the man's birth.
This is the only way to be born.
I don't know the color of my brother's face.
You can make a friend.
One should be pale or lazy.
They make you grenn dou blanch
wè depri la
Before I fell, I pouse a lot.
They are very much loved.
Li bon an pou lafyèv
They're up a pig.
Come on, there's two of them, how do you know what you're doing?
Good gen yon leaves
You've got a lot of good stuff going on.
Now you can't make me cry for you.
You don't know anything about it.
This is the genus E.
I don't know if you know what I'm talking about.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
Yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-yo, yo-
Do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you or do you do you or do you do you or do you do you or do you do you or do you do you or do you do you do you or do you do you do you or do you do you do you or do you do you do
on plant as if it were w
They do things when they are cold and they use it to make a good fit and put on a cyclo-tonne bowl.
I'm going to take a picture of you.
But you've got to do what you've got to do.
They were released in December.
I don't know if you know me.
Li yon non included li ki animal kimari de yo at konn manje chat la
He is now a rat.
Men, if you don't know what to call Langrichat or Langrichat itself, is there a party?
Fey langrichat, or even a birthday, why am I good?
Whether it's hot or cold, it's just a matter of time before it's cold or cold.
Okay, well, if something goes wrong, I'm going to plant it, but I'm going to plant all sorts of things, and I'm going to build a series of branches.
Men, they are either so or not so because of you, and you put your money where your mouth is.
If you don't know who I am, you don't know who I am.
Se fle yo wonm nou in front of you or plus
They're so close to it.
I don't have a picture of him.
There are many ways to do this.
I'm going to tell you how to make a name for myself.
Gen right on flè lye
You don't know me, do you?
Now I don't know.
I'm going to take a picture of you.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it again.
But now you don't know if it's true.
If you plant a root plant, you will be able to grow it.
I put the root in the bottle for those who are crazy.
Let them lay down.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
M pa gen plant la la men
Do you want to know more about French Wez?
Or do you know?
You don't know what to do or how to do it.
It's the only thing I've ever done before.
They're doing a lot of work.
It's a good thing we don't know.
It's good to see you again.
Tijan yo rete li
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
It's a shame for men to be ashamed of themselves.
They're doing the right thing.
It's good to know I'm going to be able to help people who know I'm going to be able to make money because I'm going to be able to help you.
Yo pa rele sonsa too.
What do you do now?
Good to see you again.
It's my fault that I'm in a bad mood.
Enbyn lap is dead.
Even though I'm in a bad mood, I can't wait to get my hands on it.
What do you call it?
I made krasav lanmi don e men ba kounen
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
Men of all kinds are men of all kinds.
I don't know what it is.
I'm not going to let you down.
other types and releases.
The men of Yon douz
The same is true of the two lanterns that make lantouray with li
The men were the first to see it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again.
They don't exist anymore.
There is no such thing as a canba.
The man immediately appears on the floor.
Now it's like planting a plant as if you're using it to make a living.
They drink or drink too much.
I don't know if you know what I'm talking about.
If you plant a plant that is good for you, it won't hurt you.
They're doing the right thing.
On two continents, there are two main reasons for this.
I don't know what to do.
Did you do anything to get rid of it?
I'm going to try and make it with a white ribbon.
I know what I'm doing.
Mounted to the right.
I'm not a friend of yours.
How many people who are unemployed do not want to lose their jobs?
Yo so douja
I have come to you, and I will come to you, and I will be with you, and you will be with me.
You're right, are you?
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
It's not a big deal.
If you have a child, you can play the flute in the vessel.
For the sake of convenience, for the sake of simplicity, I'm sure you'll be able to use it.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I know how to make you feel.
I know how to deal with them even if they call you.
It's not a big deal.
There are no other qualities.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything about it, but I'm going to be able to do something about it, and I'm going to be able to do something about it, and I'm going to be able to do something about it, and I'm going to be able to do something about it, and I'm going to be able to do something about it, and I'm going to be able to do something about it.
There is no other way.
Man con lòt non yon kod
If you don't know what to do with your child, how do you know what to do with them?
I don't want to look at the photo.
Or you are even better off.
If something makes them laugh, believe, or touch their accounts, they'll feel sorry for you.
And you're not going to be able to keep up with it.
I know I'm still here, but I don't know.
I know that I know that you are holy.
I know how to move and I know how to move.
I used to wear a granny in the sun.
You can also make a powder for a person's drink.
I can't believe it.
A release si men versus a mwen
I'm not sure who's going to do it.
The people who make kamiwi
It's been a long time coming.
The question is whether or not there's anything new.
Look at what you've done.
Or do you know him?
You know what, men, if a leaf comes out or touches them, they can make men.
There's nothing new going on again.
They're doing the same thing to me.
They're doing the same thing.
If you can make ann dannik too long
Pa lorye non men yo still love to plant the front of the dance.
I know how to kill a group.
I've always wanted to be a part of a group.
I don't want to lose my job.
Kounm pran yo netwaye sou liye you pa know ni chou blak an so only yo rele l
This is the first time I've heard of it.
There's a lot more to it than that.
This is why I'm so sorry.
There are some people who know how to play or who know how to play like that.
The people who took it for granted to make the code of the Kouma.
What do you think of me?
pi, which is not the same as a?
It's good to see if you're doing a good job.
But you know very well what you can do when you're in the country.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it.
I don't think I know you.
It's not a problem.
You do not know that I am the Lord your God.
I'm going to make it with you.
I know I'm going to write you a letter.
You also make them holy children.
Men devon la Jou Belis
This is not Belis.
It's not like it's a problem.
devon to make sure you know if it's a drama or not.
It's not like I don't know what to do with myself.
I can't believe that Gad and I are getting along so well.
It's the only way to get along with women and give birth.
I'm going to tell you a story.
I'll leave you with the foumi to bring and the foumi yo
Don't you know?
Okay, here we go.
Mouri, Rilfrid, Rilfrid Paul, Now I'm talking about being a kid, all I know is being a kid.
Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty, Matty,
I'm not going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you
I'm so happy to be here.
The relegation will be two years in the making.
I'm going to have to go back to the drawing board.
I'm not going to let you down.
Or take it or leave it.
It's not like I'm going to take a nap.
It's been a week and a half.
It's been a week and a half.
Oh, Dad, if I let this guy down, why would he stand there?
You will suffer the consequences of your sin.
You will suffer for nothing.
They're not going to take the zepon.
I'm not going to lie to the people.
I'm going to take care of it.
If you are gen san
I'm more than just an angel.
I know I'm tired of it.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm going to bite my tongue.
I'm not sure.
If you take the code, I'll give you the code.
Take them too.
They are also made of granite.
I'm going to Monchen with you.
It's called A.
The members of the ban ban plon member from m a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a
It's like a man's house.
There are no men.
The men win.
I don't want to lose you to a man.
I'm not a wine prodigy.
There are many ways to win or lose weight.
Men are the ones who win.
It's not like I'm going to beat you, I'm going to beat you, I'm going to beat you, I'm going to beat you, I'm going to beat you, I'm going to beat you, I'm going to beat you, I'm going to beat you, I'm going to beat you, I'm going to beat you, I'm going to beat you, I'm going to beat you, I'm going to beat you, I'm going to beat you, I'm going to beat you.
I'm going to fight you and I'm going to fight you and I'm going to fight you and I'm going to fight you and I'm going to fight you and I'm going to fight you and I'm going to fight you and I'm going to fight you and I'm going to fight you and I'm going to fight you and I'm going to fight you and I'm going to fight you and I'm going to fight you and I'm going to fight you and I'm going to fight you and I'm going to fight
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it to Jivin Pete.
I'm not going back to Jebet
I'm going to say a manche.
There are four main types of cooking.
Men are not allowed to pop you.
I've got four men in my pocket.
I can't help but wonder if I'm going to be able to do it.
That's what I'm talking about.
This is the first time I've been able to hit the ground running.
I'm going to be okay.
I'm going to release it.
They're giving me a chair.
You don't know anything about it.
I can't take the gospel with me.
I don't want to hear it.
I'm going to walk away from it.
I've been thinking about it for a while.
I know that I am on earth.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
It's not my fault.
When it comes down to it, there's still a lot more to come.
So as long as you don't have a problem with it, I'm not going to let you down, you're not going to make it.
Or who has ever had such a crush on you?
Frit pol, wi wil frit pol such as man, but man li abitwe bat kok such, or kapab dirise, pi jan rele man sa.
Amate, an, an, an, evari there are other ways again, then, good.
If you come to the coast of the Pacific Ocean, you'll be able to see the coastline of the Pacific Ocean.
Well, now that I've played a concert before, I'm sure everything's going to be the same.
Men pan se Telkog, they know se Telkog.
Men pan nan san cock pit, black cock lenses.
If it's OK, then it's okay, but if it's not the same color, then it's not the same color as Telkog, then it's the same color.
The men were very shrewd and mischievous.
Men know a lot about cooking.
As you know, I'm ready to go back to where I came from.
Ayk kok in Spanish.
I'm not going to take it anymore.
They talk to each other so that they can talk to each other and talk to each other.
I'm so tired of that.
It's not like it's going to be a big deal.
A lot of good in the other kid I'm doing it.
It's the fifth one.
Well, the man who knows when the thing is already there, everything is there for me to know, when the devil comes to take another, the thing is gone.
I don't know the other way around anymore, I don't know the way around, no.
You can take it or leave it.
Or if you're a zepon l, I'm going to make a zepon l.
Well, you're either ready, or you're ready.
I don't know what to do with myself.
It's time for him to come out of the closet.
This was the first time he or she had been able to meet someone else.
There's a lot more to it than that.
or cooking pot before
They can cook a good bat.
Or at least I've got a lot of anxiety, but I can't get enough of it.
You'll find all sorts of things that people can relate to.
Li pop balmayi all sorts of things in a person's base.
Li balmayi all sorts of things in a person's base.
Li bal mayi all sorts of things in the people's base
I'm sure you'll find another way.
I don't know how to cook.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
I'm not sure what to do.
Such as w plon kok la
I'm going to put it together.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
Are you in a good mood?
They've been there for a long time.
Kebekol and pou nou la
I'm not sure.
Hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
Yo ten yo volley, I volley.
This is the first time I've ever had a problem with rice.
There are other things I can do on the beach.
There are other lakond, they are the only ones that are connected.
Tell me I feel like I'm going to fight again, won't I?
Or you can't explain to me what you're doing or what you're doing.
At the expanse of the vineyard, you will find a way to make wine.
Because if or even
Is there a way to do this?
Please don't let the end of it get in the way.
There you go, retouma.
Men, men, men, I'm here to help, I'm here as a man, I'm here to help.
Do it or leave it, man.
I've been waiting for you.
I'm going to win.
It's time to talk about it.
We're always going to do a dojo.
It's like knowing that everyone is the same.
They won't even win.
The people who are responsible for this are the people who are responsible for it.
You'll have to pack your bags again.
Or even if you know how to win, everyone else will get a chance to win.
win or even win.
It's not like I'm a member of the union.
You know the value is not to be taken for granted.
He didn't want to run away.
I don't know why I'm angry.
Do you feel like you're taking a leap of faith?
That's why I'm here.
I'm going to appeal to you.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
It's time to move on to pavrit.
There are no more than forty-three members for this purpose.
It's time to move on to the next step.
And how many of them are the same?
It's all about the people.
They stand in front of the same door.
You can either put it on or off.
Paul did not know whether he was going to stay or not.
There is a lot of people standing in front of Kesire.
There are many others, such as Mèt Baryè, who call themselves Mèt Baryè, Enkesyè Seul, or Mèt Baryè.
I'm going to take care of it.
I don't know about you.
or withdraw the bank account.
I'm going to retire a few.
It's time for you to do the cooking.
or dekrepe l..
If I do this, then I will do the other.
Are you going to cut the soap?
But it's not the same as the sequel.
You've got a lot to do with it.
I'm going to take a look at some of them for a while.
Again, they ate, they took everything.
After a few more days, I'm going to take a few more shots, and I'm going to keep them out of my system.
Whether or not I'm crying or crying, I'm making a table of bronze.
Do men or women make a living out of it?
I'm always talking about the same thing as a lawyer.
It's time for you and your family to come together.
Or do you want to know what's going on?
There are two sil bon.
You can take on other cooks or win.
Or leave it alone.
That's good, that's good.
Obesity, when concentrated, increases the risk of obesity.
That's right, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let
On the other side of the fence, too.
He didn't even come.
I'm going to try and get some help.
You have no idea who you are or who you are.
Be my wife.
There's no such thing as a decade.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
I'm going to do this for you.
I'm not going to say anything before now, but I'm going to say it's okay.
Or something you can't wear or fight.
I'm going to put you in a position to fight this fight.
The advice I'll give you is to do it.
I'm not sure if this is true.
They want to do everything they can.
How do you know?
We're not going to be able to do anything about it.
Two of them are still there, aren't they?
I can't stand the fight or know what it's like.
How can you do that?
Is it time to give up or win?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again.
Who knows?
It also includes the good chiche like a.
One of the animals is a lion.
The animal is known to have been killed in action.
Such as the people of Brete.
It's all in my head.
I'm going to do it all for you.
They know what they're doing.
They've got a lot to do with lachas too.
Such as w w wè m bet
I can tell you or I can tell you Bèt la konn lan
I may or may not be wearing a seatbelt or anything like that.
The wine-eating animals know what it is like to eat the animals.
I'm not going to lie.
Well, good elements, for example, the people, the people, the people who want to come to you now, that you are the animal of the world.
L ap bouske l.
Whether it's in your mouth or in your mouth, what can you do for the animal, or what can you do for it?
I've been waiting for you.
It's only a few months away.
It's the first time they've done it.
A man who knows how to kill men is a man who knows how to kill men.
How physics can be taught in the same way as physics can be taught in physics.
I'm going to have to do something about it.
I'm not sure what's going on here.
You've got something to do or you've got something to do.
Konsan w kamma
This is what I'm talking about.
I'm going to try to find a way out of it.
Before you can kill.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
Takou took the bet la.
Or a teaspoon of tea.
Or something that makes you feel longing for it.
If you can't, you'll be in the middle of a dispute.
I would like to see a debate.
You can make everyone happy.
What is a blog?
On my grandmother's side, they were very happy.
It is possible for a generation of people to know something like a leswa to know something about De Bou and Demalis.
I know how to sing beautifully and sing it in my heart and in my heart.
It's time to move on.
Re-release the order to ankan.
Yo sa yon tout wi
I don't know him.
I don't know how to sing to you.
Let's get the students together.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm going to crawl.
I'm going to take a bath.
Or tell me something I'm going to do.
That's why I hate you.
I don't have the right to reply.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
I don't even have the right to ask questions.
Everything is in order.
I'm going to do something like this.
I'm not going to shoot you.
When the water stops flowing, the water stops flowing.
You can load or unload all the luggage or bananas or all the luggage.
Or passage or benjan from answer or di or kwen an, gonbare pou pou or di pou pou to answer.
At the end of the day, I drink beer.
Now that I've had enough, I can't sit back or drink a glass.
There is also a game, such as the team you know how to play, such as the team you know how to play.
When I leave, they go to the other side.
There is no such thing as water at all.
The people who take it are the ones who take it.
I stood up and walked.
I've been underwater for a long time.
I'm looking for someone else to look for me.
But when you shout, Eresa ey, like underwater, they take you.
There's a lot more to it than that.
A lot of the same things have been done in the past.
I can't wait to see what happens next.
You're either dead or alive.
You've got a lot of people in your life.
They know it again.
There is no such thing as a person who knows you and is sorry to ban you.
For me, it's hard to explain how I'm going to do it, but I'm going to buy a new one.
I'm going to tell you a story.
I'm going to try to figure out what's going on.
You can't be the only person I've ever met who's going to tell you the truth.
So I'm going to go with the people.
That's why I'm here.
So you're going to have to wait for someone else.
You can't put a price on something that's not real.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
What kind of tip is it?
Men, for what it's worth, I know.
I don't know if it's clear.
I've never seen a game like this before and I'll never be able to play another game like this again.
Genyen was born on the 28th of December.
Genyen toukò did not know what they were doing.
All of them are blad
You can see them on the other side of the door.
Epè Koutifi, you know the man.
You need to talk.
Hey, boys 11.
If you want to go to the other side of me, or if you want to go to the other side of me, you have to go to the other side.
There are people who have a good time and a good time, and they have a good time and a good time, and they have a good time and a good time.
What do you think I'm going to do?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
I, too, have the right to be born alone or alone, and I have the right to live in the presence of others.
Now you're going to run.
Now I'm running down the road.
It's all around the top.
Wherever I am, I have become a balloon lover.
It's all in the name.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do next.
There is no such thing as a b ap li to an an
It's a little bit of a milkshake.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
I can't wait to see what happens next.
Now I'm here to keep it and keep it in my lap.
I'm going to run.
I'm very happy with what I've got.
I'm going to do something about it.
There are no men here.
How are they doing?
I'm here for you.
Ap tose Tizak.
What is the code of conduct?
Hey, Gonj, what's the matter with me, what's the matter with Mab, huh?
I'm going to do this for you.
I'm not sure what to do.
I'm going to tell you a few things.
What kind of people do you know?
If you don't buy this person from outside, I'll buy it for you.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
What's the matter with you?
What's wrong with Yon anon?
Why can't I buy a new one, sit in my shop, or do I have a new one?
The same as if or as if you were putting it all together.
If you're good or bad, you're going to be able to help each other, so that you can help each other.
Well, well, if you're going to go to Bonvoua with this or that rice, as a matter of fact, you're going to limit yourself to other things you can buy.
If you're going to win a big fight, you're not going to be able to do it.
If anyone does, I'll give you the same amount of money to buy the same amount of money.
Ebel, I want you to call me Chelel too.
For example, there are two types of black holes in the coat of arms.
There are many ways, many ways, to help people.
It's not the end of the world!
Card on ek mesye nek sa a.
Blokè, how are you doing?
Wi, give me another day and I'll tell you again.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
Tell us about other games that are a bit of a joke.
They are even able to do the same thing.
on ti zonen kabri sou
They're on top of it.
One day I'm going to tell you how much I'm going to love you.
Dedo ekonsatri is a player who plays the role of a singer.
The earth will be turned upside down by the end of the world.
What's going on?
Who knows what friends are like?
I'm with you too.
You can meet on the spot and you can have a solid bomb and you can make it to the top of the stairs.
I put my soul to the test and I can give it back to you.
I can't wait to see who you are.
Men men men men
If you're going to make a move, you're going to make a move.
Anmen is the man who drew you here.
I've got two bedrooms and two bathrooms.
Where am I going to stay in my room?
I can't think of a better way to start tomorrow.
Ben or Ben on you men can also give you men
They fell down like this.
I'm going to send them to you.
If I were you, I'd go in, I'd meet the world to take it like this.
I can go through both before it's over, and then it's all good.
If you want to get rid of a jet, you can get rid of it.
Takou atè al
Two generations have been drawn from li.
If you are a Chabondicho well ragay yo trase li
If you're looking for something like a pair of shoes to wear, you'll want to take something from one foot to the other.
If you have a room.
They are standing in front of me.
I'm going to take a look at it.
I'm going to take it.
Let me know if I'm still here.
Now there are two comic book characters.
It's a win-win situation.
I'm going to sign up for a comic book team.
I've been banned for a long time.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to keep up with you.
If I do more or less than two out of three taps.
In the meantime, take a closer look.
There's no such thing as a man, ins!
I know what you're talking about, I know what you're talking about, I know what you're talking about, I know what you're talking about, I know what you're talking about, I know what you're talking about, I know what you're talking about, I know what you're talking about, I know what you're talking about, I know what you're talking about, I know what you're talking about.
I don't know what to say.
I'm sure you'll find someone who can help you.
as much as I need.
There is no water and no rye to keep betting on wine now or later.
I'm all set.
Can you tell me if I'm going to die, if I'm going to die?
Do you know what I'm talking about, do you know what I'm talking about?
The genome of man is the right one.
If I were a man, if I were a man, I would be a man of bronze.
If he swims, he lacks the laxative, and then he swims.
Then, go ahead and do something I know how to do right now to take me to the next level.
Gen gandwa, I have pran ti besti.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to make a big change.
In the morning, there is a left corner of Jason.
Why is it so hard for me to get to know you?
La, how do you know the name of the lake?
I'm not going to say anything about it.
I know how much we've been waiting for.
I'm going crazy and I'm going crazy and I'm going crazy and I'm going crazy.
Or the demon doesn't know you or I don't know you.
I know who I'm going to fish for now.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Or I can be your man.
I knew I was going to be able to do this.
What is the meaning of rakond menmi?
For the sake of clarity, for the sake of clarity, there is.
Is there anyone among you who would listen to me?
Are you going to call another jan anko?
So, why don't you call me Jane?
They appear, and then they come to me.
It's what you take.
I put them in two pairs.
The consensus is that I will do what I can.
I'm going to tell you two things.
When it comes down to it, I'm sorry.
Before, like I took it, I put on a lot of things, I put on a suit, for fish and a drink.
Do you want me to wear a bra?
I put in two, a pit in the back of the house, and when I finally came back for a year, I was fine.
It's the only thing I can do.
When you're throwing a good one away, don't you think you're a fish?
I'm still in the same boat.
Two li, two fish teeth when I'm talking about one boud tooth.
An eye, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth
It's not just a fish, it's a fish, it's a fish, it's a fish, it's a fish, it's a fish, it's a fish, it's a fish, it's a fish, it's a fish, it's a fish, it's a fish, it's a fish, it's a fish, it's a fish, it's a fish, it's a fish, it's a fish, it's a fish, it's a fish, it's a
I can't take it from you, because if I want to retire, I'll take it from you.
Zélon, Zélon, my people cry out to you.
I mean, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know,
I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean,
Do you want to kill your soul?
If you are a fisherman, you are a fisherman.
It's just like when you're in the middle of something.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
It's not going to affect you.
I'm on my way.
Pwasan, they're so big, they're coming out of the corner, like simay yo, or sima la too big.
I'll also be releasing an extended concert.
Do you feel sorry for me?
You're still swimming.
I'm going to kill you, I'm going to kill you, I'm going to kill you, I'm going to kill you, I'm going to kill you, I'm going to kill you, I'm going to kill you, I'm going to kill you, I'm going to kill you, I'm going to kill you, I'm going to kill you, I'm going to kill you, I'm going to kill you, I'm going to kill you.
Ban, you value fish or know how to fish or know how to fish or know how to fish.
A swimming pool is a swimming pool.
Gen sou jen
I'm not sure what to do about it.
It is now known as Gen pa san Bekin.
Toujou nan andle, nan andle dou sou yon yon?
Or do you want to know who I am?
What else do you know?
I can't tell you how much I'm going to eat.
Pa Izetbo an gen yon like la a, or konn jan men.
Now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now,
I'm also a one-on-one.
I'm sorry about that.
I'm also one of those men.
I'm going to send you a pack of water.
I am the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the One, the
similar to genken tou
Anbèbèbèbèbb an galè a
I don't want to be a mother.
There is a lot to be said for all the people who have heard it.
We are always on the lookout for something new.
It's like when you're in the water, you're in the water.
My dad or dad drinks too much.
Or I could just sit on the water and do something bad.
If you can't get a fish, you can't get a fish, and you can't get a fish again.
Other people don't know how to express themselves.
Have you ever heard of the fish that made Micah?
Or are they still alive?
Before the debate started, there was no debate.
It's like everyone else is doing it.
The baptism of Jeremiah.
There is a lot of people out there who don't care.
I'm going to tell you a story.
One of the main reasons for this is that it's not possible.
Everybody's up to speed.
I'm going upstairs and I'm going upstairs and I'm going upstairs and I'm going upstairs and I'm going upstairs and I'm going upstairs and I'm going upstairs and I'm going upstairs and I'm going upstairs and I'm going upstairs and I'm going upstairs and I'm going upstairs and I'm going upstairs and I'm going upstairs and I'm going upstairs and I'm going upstairs and I'm going upstairs and I'm going upstairs and
Then they hit you up.
On the other hand, there is no other way to dissolve.
Everyone has the right to a fair trial.
Everyone has the right to a fair trial.
And when I get there, it's like a good place to stand.
I can take it as far as I can.
It's all in your head.
Now I'm going to have to go to the bathroom.
One of the most important things to do is to make sure that you're in the right place.
I can do anything to make bullets.
You can't just walk in the water.
It's the right thing to do.
I can't get ahead of myself.
Let's see, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up?
If you're looking for something new, you're looking for something new.
It's one of my favorite things to do.
I want to be able to drink this kind of tea, and I'm going to be great at it.
How could you think of such a thing so that I could see it in the big picture?
Once again, I'm going to take them, and I'm going to take them.
What good is it for men to think about how to get to the top?
When Anne and I get back together again, we'll be back together.
I'm going to make you a cup of tea.
We are the people of four people.
In order to keep the crap out of the way, they can do so.
They can't be bothered.
I'm sure you'll find a way.
It is all about everything.
If you're a big fan of the typewriter, you're a big fan of the typewriter.
I know what you're talking about.
such as making tifil
I'm going to take a look at the results.
I'm not going to take it anymore.
It's just a matter of time before it's over.
A cure is a cure.
I know how to prepare with l.
I'll leave you with the right to go fishing.
There is a new version.
We've never met a fisherman together.
I've been working on it for a long time.
I'm going to ask you.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
Why do I have to ask?
I'm a fisherman, and I'm a fisherman, and I'm a fisherman again.
And when we get to the end of the day, we're not going to be able to get to the end of the day.
I'm going to take care of it.
Whether it's by the sea or by the sea.
If you are happy, the sea will turn to you, turn to you, turn to you, turn to you, turn to you, turn to you.
There is no such thing as the sea.
It's a fishy thing to do.
There are two types of people.
There are no men in the palace.
So if you can't fish, and you can't eat, you can't eat.
You're not going to be able to keep up with the demands of your partner, but you're not going to be able to keep up with the demands of your partner.
If you believe in my spirit, if you want to read it, or if you want to read it, move on.
I'm very moved.
Therefore, no one is perfect or capable of man.
But is it good, as if the person had sinned, that there were no dangers?
They are always on the lookout for you.
Well, if there's anything I can do to let you know if the lab finds it.
I know, I know, I know the temperature.
I'm going to have to go back to work and I'm going to have to go back to work and I'm going to have to go back to work and I'm going to have to go back to work and I'm going back to work and I'm going back to work and I'm going back to work and I'm going back to work and I'm going back to work and I'm going back to work and I'm going back to work and I'm going back to work and I'm going back to work and I'm going back to
Be it animals or animals, you know what to do or what to do to kill your animals.
What do you think about it?
If you're going to be poisoned, you're going to have to be cleaned.
Well, if there's any other animals I've ever bought, now I am.
Wi, w bought the chat.
Even if I give birth to a child, I can constipated.
Thy cat's me, yeah, like the sea, no hand's left.
Gen de le yo know who you want to be.
I'm not a big fan of it.
Gen de jan yo konn rele li
I know the balloon as if it could be used.
Gen de l bach a.
Yon ba chan
chat gen yon goon other goon tibet
It's very scary.
I know I'll tell you how to cook, I'll tell you how to cook.
There are no other animals that are similar in appearance to the wolves.
They don't want to lose anything but a lot of money.
There is no such thing as a love affair.
I'm going to open my mouth to the whole country.
The lock is locked and unlocked.
An animal or gen, for example, a garden, for example, a garden, for example, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a garden, a
Yon top pale de chen, lè chen an, èlè chen an, eti fè tichen, yon rele pitit live tichen.
So, how do you know if you're going to make it?
They can be worn.
I can't wait to see what I'm going to do.
Ap sadap sèdam ap Japle
There are only nine of them.
The cont nou li like to fly your sou nou
It's time to move on to something new.
I'm going to be able to do this for a while.
Gede Moun Niden was born.
I bet we're not.
It's not like I'm going to be able to make a living off of it.
It's a good name.
And then there's the next one.
There is no such thing as a big deal.
There's no such thing as a man.
There are many agranman ones.
That's why I'm here too.
That's the way it is.
Nou ban on l'autre nou jan series of animals such as feet on a fish or an orindòy ap contesye or tandou lit
It's on the water.
I can't get enough of the water.
If you want to know what's going on in your life, don't be afraid to ask for help.
Se gen, what are the angels?
I don't want to talk about Zandole a big new game but I believe that Zandole is going to be a big Kounèv.
Ya zandole yon looks exactly the same.
I'm sure I'll be able to keep up with you.
There is a lot of salt in it.
Other series of debets yo ti tanj mwen
One way or especially one way to beat a batman.
I'm going to go with the men.
The men's genome is similar to that of a skoupyon.
There is more to it than meets the eye.
They are more common in animals than they are in animals.
Everything is going to be fine.
I've got other men to help me.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to stand up and be counted.
Or we're going to stop doing that.
There's been so much going on, so much going on, so much going on, and so much going on.
I hope I'll follow you.
Men, if you have such a people on this road, you will be able to fight them easily.
Beast, ever since I've been with you, I've been with you.
No, I'll make a tea like that.
I can follow you more than I can follow a fan like that.
The person who is in charge of the bar is a man who is in charge of the bar.
Gen yon anbèt gen yon anbèt
There are even two men in the house.
There are no hard threads.
I'm going to have to cook a bunch of them.
I've seen it all before.
Pa exyonm Obeventan la
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it myself.
I want to turn it around.
Bon ti besti kanmen m bon
I'm going to ask you a question.
Genyen himself is a monk.
It's like having a baby and having a baby like this.
Or joun yo, i know two men who go into you.
M ap Yanda, m ap Yanda a li, m ap Yenda yo gen zeb, yo gen zel, ma, m ap Yanda below.
What other people are excited about?
But, when I sleep, a goat and a member of a nine-month-old chicken hatch, you are the same.
We are big animals, as big as we can be, as big as we are all humans, as big as we are, as big as we are, as big as we are, as big as we are, as big as we are, as big as we are, as big as we are, as big as we are, as big as we are, as big as we are, as big as we are, as big as we are, as big as we are, as big as we are, as big as we are, as big as we are, as big as we are, as big as we
It's all about men.
We are all plap plap lè te zanat p vole klewe kouchabè
I'm going to tell you what I want.
I'm going to tell you a story.
I'm going to tell you all about it.
Or even worse.
When I'm a man, when I'm a man, when I'm a man, when I'm a man, when I'm a man, when I'm a man, when I'm a man, when I'm a man, when I'm a man, when I'm a man, when I'm a man, when I'm a man, when I'm a man, when I'm a man, when I'm a man, when I'm a man, when I'm a man.
OK, well, the people who have m, like the seven, they're the ones who have the weight.
Do you know what I'm talking about?
It's not like we don't know what's going on here.
You can also ask God to help you.
They are in a relationship with God.
I've been waiting a long time for you.
That's why I'm here.
Who will live a long life?
All of you can stand up and be counted.
I want to take a good photo of you all.
on the ban of bet la
You're so hot now I'm ready to go.
I know that you're going to be happy and that you're going to be happy and that you're going to be happy and that you're going to be happy and that you're going to be happy and that you're going to be happy and that you're going to be happy and that you're going to be happy and that you're going to be happy and that you're going to be happy and that you're going to be happy and that you're going to be happy and that you're going to be happy and that you're going to be
I'd like to take a picture of you in the back of your friend's face.
You're not the only one, but it's nice to admire.
As a matter of fact, it's just a matter of time.
I can't wait to get started with this one right now.
Start now and light the lamp.
I've been in prison for a long time now.
Are they still on the horizon?
Or they're just like the people in prison.
You know where you are.
It's all about the stuff.
For those of you who are not familiar with it.
I'll be there for you soon.
My prisoners are in concert with the animals who live in the whole behind the scenes of the Karank people.
Yes, if you're under the covers, you know you can get in.
If there are many animals, many people, many people, and if there is only one person, you can do the same.
Pokou lal, silhou a, silhou a, ta kout ap won yourself.
Yon joula or vini
I'm going to tell you how many people I've met.
There are even animals I'm not a man now.
Li genke long m
This is a wet nan anbwa vay zanm zanm
This is not a matter of opinion.
What's the big deal?
The beast of men.
Praise the same to Men
Children should be able to hold on to them.
I've been trying to get in touch with you.
Because everything has to be done.
I know how to make music.
And the teeth are brittle.
No, they know, they are jealous, they are jealous, vanvan.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
I'm sure you'll be able to get a few more for a while.
Tibet is at the crossroads of san.
You can collect the same amount of paper.
I'm going to tell you something.
I've got a few.
I don't want to go to work.
Takou w the work of osreye debèt
I know I'm a bad guy and I know I'm a bad guy.
King yon men.
When I heard you say, if you don't know me, if you stand on your feet, you don't say anything.
Gen yon ki mode
The men are getting up on their feet or on their knees.
Take them to the top.
They don't know how to do it.
Gen arrives behind men.
It's my fault.
One of the animals was born.
It's Sunday morning and there's a lot to do.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do next.
They even know what it's like to be like or where I'm going.
There are many or many toothbrushes.
Ap van van men is one of them.
Yes, if there is a place for too many men to go to Mitras, I doye or deyou like men, it or piton class slise.
Sanpo, howmi, howmi, howmi, howmi, howmi.
Men can't speak for themselves.
If you have such a tag on your san gate, or if you're a fan, I'll tell you what I want to say.
I'm a man and I'm a man.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm sure you'll be able to make a very good impression on me.
It's time for you to go back to your roots.
They're coming out of the closet.
I'm in the mood for something new.
There are many languages spoken.
I'm going to have to go with you.
I have an order.
I ordered a large vase and a large vase.
Li loves to live with a lot of pets.
What is the meaning of chatan very much
It's not like I'm going to stop them.
The same is true of the jade riyal, all covered with jade riyal.
If the color is in the form of a doson, then there is nothing wrong with it.
It's green in color and some gas, it's yellow in color and it's your son.
M, you're going to get a lot of palm oil.
And you're the same person.
They have so much to sing and to sing in 17 languages.
I can't sing too much.
For this reason, one can sing in such a way that the king can sing.
Non gen yon m
They're not even big enough.
Pi grap under the osyon l the anman l
It's hard to know what to do with your money.
It's hard to say how much I'm going to take away from you.
When I was a teenager, I was a teenager.
It's not like I'm going to flannel.
I don't know if I can believe it.
It's the same here.
It's the same here.
You win, you win, you win, you win, you win.
They're even singing about it.
I'd like to know if I could play it or if I could use it to get rid of it.
tèlman chante ou dous
And for that matter, it's not just a question of whether or not it's a question of whether or not it's a question of whether or not it's a question of whether or not it's a question of whether or not it's a question of whether or not it's a question of whether or not it's a question of whether or not it's a question of whether or not it's a question of whether or not it's a question of whether or not it's a question of whether or not it's a question of whether or not.
What about you and Zomi Zizyen?
Wi, jou and zomi zisyen.
Man in another, man in another, man in another, man in another, man in another.
It's the same as a dollar.
Li gen yon color vetson m an odol
The epi grif is located underneath the valve.
Under the knife and under the javelin.
A yellow color.
You've got a lot to do with your child.
Are you ready for it?
It's not just men, it's men.
It looks very much like Zebablè a.
There is nothing new here.
It's not like I'm a kid anymore.
Hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
Well, there's another one, if I can't do it all, I can do it all, if I'm not going to do it all.
Well, they're perfect even if I'm always going to Bable a, they're in the fifth grade, and they're in the fifth grade.
The gospel is one of them.
Beasts are even more powerful than the Greeks and Babylonians.
But I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
Man gen yon
It's not the same person.
You're not going to be able to do that.
Men and women don't know.
It's easy to recognize when you don't know l..
Neither are they, nor are they.
Yo gen yon a lovely green fonse, a sari of cloves.
I've got a lot of other men.
There is no such thing as a new generation of men.
I have all my children.
All the children were born to him.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
I'm not going to lie to you.
I'm not going to lie.
They send them to their cell to the fan, and when they come to me, they're like a big fly.
rele, or an gana y gès.
You can't take it easy if you can't take it easy.
It's not like you're going to be able to move on with your life.
So prescribed is the use of a mosquito.
This is such a paradise.
It's such a pity on man m.
Now we have a new one.
One of the reasons for this is that we can't go back to this stage.
I'm going to tell you everything I need to know and everything I need to know.
The cells are long.
I'm going to eat a chan kre in the middle of it.
Now may or may not be a good time.
In a nutshell, in a nutshell?
That's how I'm going to make a big deal out of it.
It's not enough to get a new gene, it's more than enough to get a new gene.
It's not just a matter of getting people involved.
It's the only thing I know.
I'm going to have to do two things.
It's about having a baby.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I'm not a fan of these things.
There is no such thing as an unknown person.
or tral dollar pi en Mwen toucen
I don't know if I'm going to be able to recognize it, but I'm going to recognize it.
There is a lot of people out there who want to make a difference in the lives of their children.
When you sing one lap, make it sit, and so forth.
I know you feel sorry for me, but when I sing a song, I'm singing a song, don't you?
It's on the right.
I'm going to try to make a three-fold increase in so much soap.
I know what you mean, but I'm not sure what you mean.
Well, I know what you're talking about, man, man, man, man, man, man, man.
You win, they're going to win.
If you want to know where you come from or what you want to know, even the Accountant does not have a way to tell you.
If you do, you're not going to be able to do it.
There is a white rail above the chak I, and a yellow trailer behind the cell, so that the bottom of the cell is good.
It's a beautiful and colourful look.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
I've been trying to figure out what I want to do with my life.
I'm going to tell you something.
You're going to have to go back to the drawing board.
I'm going to take a picture of it.
I'm looking forward to it.
I'm going to take a picture.
You are in my midst now and everything is underneath me now.
And then there's Jason Sen.
Kit men win an other swazo
Men win an other swazo
There is no other way to win.
There are many different types of shoes available in different colors.
In front of your head.
You're a child and you're behind me.
There's a lot of white under the boots.
They are generated as di di.
It's also one of the largest white tubes in the world.
A love tube is in the middle.
I'll have to see if I'm a pros and cons.
It's all about the people.
The flow of the lens is as simple as that of the lens.
One of the men is the same.
I don't want to be a mother myself.
I'm like the people in the city who know me, I know who I am.
I'm going to direct your mouth.
And in addition to touwouz, also, saske gen of various kinds of tako, i swè, man gen li li li li pioneer anè, ki menm, well let, but touman.
The same can be said of the data being stored in the database.
They don't look the same.
They're all right here.
They're big enough.
They look like they're in you.
I'm on the same page as you.
Toukou kote gen ti grin thing is not the thing of menmen la
You're the only one who knows.
However, all of you, the people who have me with your little ones, if you are you, you are my grandfather, even my great-grandfather.
Yes to la, yes to la.
I've got it, I've got it, if it's almost the same as everything else, it looks, it looks.
But, yes, yes, I'm bigger, I'm shorter than all of Peter.
I've got another one on the other side.
I've got a lot of things I can do.
The men are gravely ill.
Let them be with you.
Pasve pati pou pou l
There's a lot of color in it.
Not everything is present in your branch.
I'm going to drink it, I'm going to eat it, I'm going to drink it, I'm going to drink it, I'm going to drink it, I'm going to drink it, I'm going to drink it, I'm going to drink it, I'm going to drink it, I'm going to drink it, I'm going to drink it, I'm going to drink it, I'm going to drink it, I'm going to drink it, I'm going to drink it, I'm going to drink
I'm very happy with it, I'm very happy with it, I'm very happy with it, I'm very happy with it, I'm very happy with it, I'm very happy with it, I'm very happy with it, I'm very happy with it, I'm very happy with it, I'm very happy with it, I'm very happy with it, I'm very happy with it, I'm very happy with it, I'm very happy with it, I'm very happy with it.
If you're cloning and passing by, you're going to get it.
If the Azel clone is to be born of men, it is to be born of men.
It is good for condensation.
A second ancestor of a second gene is cloned and several other genes are cloned.
It's great to be able to confide in the passing of time.
It's time to move on.
It's like a child.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
My mother lived in your order from the world to the present.
It's not my fault.
They're living on the edge of their seats.
Where I'm living today is where I'm going to be in Las Vegas in the morning, and where I'm going to be in the morning.
It's all about running.
Nou vin abite isi a with ouvazen sa
This is one of the reasons why I can't tell you what Makjist is.
There is no wine coming in.
I've been praying to God for more than my mother has broken.
My mother broke things up and I ran away and thanked her so that she could stay alive for a day.
I'm not sure where I'm going to be, but I'm sure I'll be there.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do next.
Galik mwen on kay Bèl
I want to see how the members of my family behave.
It's even better if you buy it.
If you are a child of God, always pray to God.
Mande Allah lavi for the presidency of the country.
Because the president has put a lot of money into it to make me feel better.
I'm going to buy Jougia.
That's why I bought it.
food production m yo
I'll take it if I don't get paid as soon as I get my money's worth.
I'm going to buy it and I'm going to go through another hurricane and I'm not going to go through another one again.
I'm going to win the lottery.
Rome would buy a new wine and take another cyclone to the railway station.
Gen tangè under the kounesans m
It's a good way to consume.
It's a chance to win the championship.
It's an icon of the wine industry.
I've been waiting for you to come through.
I've been drinking wine for a while.
There are three ways in which it can be retired or disposed of.
You may not be able to make a bookou ravay
They break the lungs a lot.
Even God has given me a chance to live forever.
We're not going to be able to keep up with your kids anymore.
I prayed to God that he would give me as much as I wanted, so that I could get back to him.
Start by having a seafood or other snack in your mouth and come to the party from 10 a.m. to 11 a.m.
A breeze le sa asyoute outside opakaj into the country
If you don't, you'll have to clean up.
Pass it to the people.
We've got a lot of friends and family that we've got here.
My dad and I discussed it.
I drink wine, but I feel like I want to die.
I'm going to have to go through a couple of things.
The men who drank the wine made them and the men who drank the wine made them.
It's not with me.
They don't have to go through the water.
They're going to have to come in the morning and they're going to have to come all over the country and they're going to have a breeze.
It's been a while since I've broken up.
The men are the same.
I'm here to help you.
Between the two bands I fell.
There are even 3 sets of boxes and a surrounding area.
The grass is falling.
But God made them fall.
I will send you a sinister message for the people.
The population of the country is estimated to be in the same table as the population of the country.
If you send me a mile or so, I'll send you a mile or so.
They are separated by bay 2.
I'm looking for nothing new but something new than adults and I'm always looking for something new.
It is always composed of adults.
I'm either new or I'm still here.
After this cycle, you will not eat, you will not drink, you will not drink, you will not drink.
We're not competing with you.
I've spent a lot of time trying to make potatoes.
Li pouse or get bujou an malgri l pa pa l ap chans lite ankon
Or now I.
Or batting with your child.
Now there is another dimension to the new work.
If you don't know the dishes you're eating, you can't drink the blood of the placenta.
In the meantime, I'm not going anywhere.
In the meantime, we're going to have to pay a month's rent or pay a month's rent.
A few plates of wine can be made with donnen or pi short.
The new plates or bayes will be ready for you sooner.
You can't find a way to live your life.
Chistan Bon or you k sa kaze no much
It's just that I don't want to make you cry.
It's like breaking your heart.
It can be either live or live, or chak or bije.
I've been in a good position since then.
Then the omission can make 3-4 phones or bri lebwa yo make lacho epi or baye cafe a yo chouk la yo letay
Chouk la yo apre agounòm vin li machavèt nou bon nou dimension nou debwaze yo wine pouse yo aprè or week aprè
After a week, you'll be able to bounce back and forth.
You've got two coats.
Even if you have a problem or a problem, you can't run away from it or go back to it.
There are five or two ways to solve a genetic problem.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to do it myself or not.
Viv or so jistan or kabagay
For example, if for example w or gen grangou la
Pou konya mounman an gen grangou
We will be reporting for or on a country's grangou petition.
I'm very happy with it.
Menè sa café a pa siplòn in Kounya
I'm going to have a cup of coffee.
How am I supposed to prepare for this?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
Get your mantra out of the new console and you'll have a lot of fun and you'll want to go through it.
I want you to know that I believe that there is nothing left to do with your homework.
They are closely related to the prevalence.
Bon mwen an tou kote kon zanwout grenne yo.
Alansye sakre si ou sidi or loun at a w ap work
Or always bring a chaou an proteksyou
Or is it still all bad tea?
work or wear.
work or not work.
or work in a restaurant.
When the storm or hurricane passes, it's too late.
It's not like it's going to be a breeze.
I'm still not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
They don't go through the door or find your mountain or live.
That's not the way it's supposed to be.
That's why you're so good at voting, you're so good at everything, no, you're so different.
The pilot of the new car and the driver behind the doughnut are ready to drink.
You're going to have to drink a lot more than that.
If you want to know about the plant, you can plant it on your own.
Always put Mouman in the planting of the wine pair in September so that there is always a movement in the school with the children.
There is no need for all children to go to school.
It can be bought or sold because the coffee is very good for you.
The wine is the same as the weight of men.
Because it's gone or lost in time.
I've always banned the baby pivalab, the tribe.
It's the first day of February.
If the random man is too old, he can't do it.
You can bring all the other foodstuffs you eat, and you can still cook all the other food you eat.
Now you have the right to play, now you have the right to play, now you have the right to play, now you have the right to play, now you have the right to play, now you have the right to play, now you have the right to play, now you have the right to play, now you have the right to play, now you have the right to play, now you have the right to play, now you have the right to play, now you have the right to play, now you have the right to play.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it all the time or if I'm going to be able to put on a kitten.
It's time to invest in other catastrophes.
There's a new term for it.
I'm going to have to wear a glove.
Then I'll give you the law.
There is no such thing as a win-win situation.
There are many new columns and priests, and there are many good ones to choose from.
But I always walk on the site of the reactionary church that knows how to say something new.
Despite the fact that there are no winners of the competition.
We always put on new drops of new drops of grass.
They're a force to be reckoned with.
You'll always find it there, so you can protect yourself.
Because the technology of the station is still in use.
Yo oujan brother t
Take it or leave it.
Until you have a chance to do something about it, or until you've had a chance to do something about it, or until you've had a chance to do something about it.
Protect them or not.
In most cases, the children are even as often as possible.
Payizan payizan pump is a payment to me or a few times more often than not.
A few months later.
Li woufanm sa anwi a la
It's your key.
Or by pranke tout or sel ko si premiy ap a ak kor kret
andwa jen second nan si second nan an ak tout plafond or bonye bwa o yon
I'm still trying to do more than that.
It's always the same or your people and times are not the same.
They are the same good people as the good antiques.
Good people who respect bansyon law yon se yo gen gen other ba
I'm always on the lookout.
of agitating problems and how to cope with them.
I don't know anything else about the whole thing.
It's your generation.
I don't know if I'll ever know.
It's called the palm tree.
It's the only thing I can tell you about men.
I'm going to tell you about my family.
I've got a lot of things going on.
I've been informed about it.
Now we have a chance to avoid an accident or stand for eight years.
It's not easy being a brilliant driver.
Or to respect you.
Now that an accident has occurred, it's easy.
There was an accident.
I've always had a lot of illness, a lot of sickness, I've suffered a lot of injuries, but I've got a lot of loads.
And I'm still suffering from it.
They know what they're doing wrong.
Each week, you'll be able to help people with disabilities.
Now we have the same problem.
God has always forbidden it.
Even if it is too much, it's too late, and I'm going to send you a message.
If Satan is a demon, if Satan is a demon, if Satan is a demon, if Satan is a demon, if Satan is a demon, if Satan is a demon, if Satan is a demon, if Satan is a demon, if Satan is a demon, if Satan is a demon, if Satan is a demon, if Satan is a demon, if Satan is a demon, if Satan is a demon, then Satan is a demon.
On another bay again
Or another chance to ask God.
God has given us a great opportunity to pray with our prayers and pray for us in this new phase of our life.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
E, go to the party.
This is the new year of Easter.
There is a lot of confusion.
Thank you so much for your support of 7 people.
8 year old boys
They live on the beach.
There is no question about the ban on money or the Pension You Baye Toupiti
But I still have the chance to live in the new world with you.
I've always wanted to be a doll.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to make it to the 1900s or 1900s, but I'm so excited.
It's a bit of a shock to me.
Even though they have children, they have no children.
Do you have children who are good at school?
They're going to have to come up with a plan.
I've been doing this since I was a kid.
He went to school with his brother, who taught his children.
Men who have been married since the beginning of the marriage are not allowed to marry.
I've lost my chance and I want to go to school.
There's a lot more to it than that.
I'm going to get married.
For many years I have been living in Paris.
King Jeremiah Yozeel commanded all tawas here.
I am against Monseyèk Jeremiah and I am against Jeremiah.
They are not commanded to do so.
Alò depatman te lakam tanslè li partí bon moun koray
The camp is now under the control of the Siblon department.
I'm not going to let you get away with it.
I don't know if it's a problem or not.
This is a new problem as well as a new one.
After the first few days of the new synagogue, there is no longer a synagogue.
There are a few things I can't say.
In order to do this, you need some good professional preparation.
I've never been in a car before and I've never been in a car before.
If I had to do it all over again, I'd have to do it all over again.
You allow your children to suffer, whether it's in school or in the country, for your own good.
I'm going to be on my own, and I'm not going to feel bad either.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
Isrit nou gen children all in all will yo, gen children who decko l w kay difon, gen yen stand ren, gen y jeremi.
Even if we have the capacity to do so.
If I could live without the child, I'd love to.
There are several generations of people around the world.
Or wet children or princesses.
I'm not sure about that.
If the capacity can be increased.
It's easy to make or break.
as school la yo tou has and
If you want to send a message or post a message, please send it to us.
Or two brothers w la pi kab potejou or
or Mokay party.
It's not Jenmi An.
It's not like you're going to be able to do it or not.
or pati jenmi
and jenmi konnyan nou pri nou jan an.
I'm going to hold on to that.
It's because he's old.
They also have more water or water when they are older.
There is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there is more water, there
The water flows through it.
And the water is flowing through it.
I'm going to tell you what's going on.
I've never been able to get my grandfather's hair done before.
It's not easy being good.
I've never been there before.
I'm going to tell you about Bouyeswa Bouki.
It's called Jonvèn.
What can my grandfather say?
When I woke up, did I come from my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother, my older brother?
They say it's a
I'm not going to be here again.
Someone is going to make me cry.
I'm going to do my best when it comes to finding Malis.
I'm going to get the Malis.
Malis even of now is on the verge of extinction.
He is my grandfather's brother.
You're either a bandit or you're not a bandit.
How to prase or even two k pare in front of me.
I don't have a grandfather to do this to me.
I'm going to tell you what's going on here.
It's not about men.
It's my grandfather's job to take me to you.
It's a little bit like salt and pepper.
It's not like they're not going to be able to do it.
I'm not going to tell people what to do, but I'm not going to tell them what to do.
bouki lè rete
Direan bouki rete
Read the web and the Lan Code.
The code is good and the code is good today I'm receiving a review I'm dying to know.
Malis even the base of your back is li
My grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's grandfather was his grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's grandfather's grandfather.
It's not just the balls.
Finil finil taye janm bout Tout nou a bouki kouche
I'm going to die in a moment.
I'm going to cut bouki and make you fight bouki, I'm going to make you where I want to be.
I would like to thank everyone who has been there for me.
Yes, I'm still here.
Okay, or there's another teaspoon.
A, no gen is still there.
You don't know what to do, you don't know what to do, you don't know what to do, you don't know what to do, you don't know what to do, you don't know what to do, you don't know what to do, you don't know what to do.
Matten an m prale in the pyezoran men
The man who wanted to pay the rent was the man who wanted to pay the rent for a living in Landal.
If you are disappointed, I will end up with you.
Other times I'd go back and plan new things for tomorrow.
Men are pissed or a grand di
I'm the grandmother.
How are you going to make men fleri
What is the meaning of zwan men mwen and what is the meaning of zwan men fleri
What is the meaning of the word "bond" and what is the meaning of the word "bond"?
How do you know that you're not going to flourish?
What is the meaning of zwan men kab.
You are not a typical person.
The tipye zaranmen are now known.
I'm not going to lie to you.
not tipye zaranmen
tipye zaranmen mi
Don't worry about it.
He is the only one who has the power to change the world.
san bouki ke manye manman malis
Malish te gen mama i bouk ki gen mama li li li li li li li li li li li li li li li li li li li li li li
I know my mother's side of the family.
I'm in the mood for epi.
Malish even though.
I'm going to be a mother before I'm done.
I know my mom is fine now, and I know my mom's mom is fine now.
bouki the same network link men
onfen m granfrenm
Anman Anen Le Ale Yo Fin is now the mother of Malis.
I'm going to be a mother bouki.
Directs the mother bouki
Even Malis would have seen them at the end of the day, but now she's completely out of her mind.
I'm in high school and I'm at the top of my game.
It's the only way to get to the top of the tree.
I'm going to the Maldives.
They have nothing to do with Malis.
Chèm resipran Jodi a mon
I'm going to try to find a recipe for it.
I'm going to have to change my mind.
I'm going to take care of it.
I'm going to get Malis and I'm going to get Malis and I'm going to get Malis and I'm going to get Malis and I'm going to get Malis and I'm going to get Malis and I'm going to get Malis and I'm going to get Malis and I'm going to get Malis and I'm going to get Malis and I'm going to get Malis and I'm going to get Malis and I'm going to get Malis and I'm going to get Malis and
Malis is still alive.
There's nothing wrong with that.
There are many other things that are important to me.
I can't wait to see what you do with it.
There is no such thing as prale la
Don't worry about your problems.
I'm already in the wine business.
I've been drinking wine for my mom and I've been drinking wine for my mom and I've been drinking wine for my mom and I've been drinking wine for my mom and I've been drinking wine for my mom and I've been drinking wine for my mom and I've been drinking wine for my mom and I've been drinking wine for my mom and I've been drinking wine for my mom and I've been drinking wine for my mom and I've been drinking wine for my mom and I've been drinking wine for my mom and I've been drinking wine
They're going to have to come up with a plan.
They're good.
I am not receiving the money.
I'm looking forward to seeing you.
Anlè a Gon moun
I'm looking forward to seeing what's going on.
That's how I did it.
This is how they do it, and it's not my fault.
That's what I'm talking about.
It's the same person.
Pasou Krikòn is now in a state of disrepair.
The book is a collection of short stories.
Boki and Bon Malis are the same as Boki.
The children of kilèsyouyepit the same mother
Pasdiou Krikòn is now one of the world's most popular tourist destinations.
The man I'm holding is a drunk.
Ap la chair, or li retanle, al di mezanbi men, the man of the renter!
Mezan mi bye bouki rentre la o vino va por m men men sole por a bouki mande kont bouki l mujer
The man is the only woman bouki woman
Bouki's dead men are still the same as men's.
I'm going to book a ticket to Germany.
It's either a booke or a dick.
Bouke fin now mother Li fin now mother Malis with
They're fine now with your mom.
It's good to be Malis but I can't or won't.
It's called Monche.
I'm going to cut it off.
Now there can be a new one, now there can be a new one.
In this way Malis pre-dates the birth of a child.
I'm a member now.
tou vin now mama an alo
She's a new mother now.
Even if my wife is not there, she is not there.
I'm so happy to be able to get my wife to take care of me now.
Now I know what I'm talking about.
It's not like it's your birthday.
Bon gen nou m
It's a good place to fish.
on the jlo fish.
or fish such as a or a.
Anpè bon mesye si se dyskou nou ante map ban nou dyskou?
Only a woman who forbids me to drink is allowed to drink.
It's just a matter of time before I get a drink.
There are people who are willing to give up their lives for the betterment of the world.
I live in a world where I can't do anything right now.
I'm not going to talk about it.
If we can do that, we're going to have to find a way to do it.
Think of it this way: I'm going to draw water and I'm going to draw water and I'm going to draw water and I'm going to draw water and I'm going to draw water and I'm going to draw water and I'm going to draw water and I'm going to draw water and I'm going to draw water and I'm going to draw water and I'm going to draw water and I'm going to draw water and I'm going to draw water and I'm going to draw water and I'm going to draw water.
If the same thing were to happen to Bremann's grandfather, he would have to pay a penny.
They are directed to the gen of Nachòdiye a
I'll let you know when I get there.
They're taking on a life of their own.
I cut it off with you.
I went back to taking other monsters.
I'm cutting you a
They're going to have to come up with a solution.
The rambou m alpe zova is located in choudi a.
They took the keybase.
There are four ways to do this.
They even deposit it in a car.
I don't want to hear it.
If you're going to listen to me, you're going to listen to me.
When I was a kid, I wanted to drink wine.
The flavor of the wine appeared so, they looked great now.
Two days ago, I had a dream and a dream that I would never forget.
But today I am able to move on to become a Christian.
They told me that I was going to be a Christian.
The guy's doing the same thing.
That's how they do it.
The men were waiting until he arrived.
Fin ne okipe
The rest of the time I'm busy renting a randon.
They're not going to be able to keep up with what I'm saying, and they're not going to be able to keep up with what I'm saying.
I've never seen anything like this before.
They don't say anything.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do with my life.
I'm all for the kite vanyen.
Since I've been drinking wine, I've fallen into a coma.
They've got a lot to do with it.
I don't know if it's true or not.
I don't know if it's grenetwal or not.
The men of the bayou bayou wouzou
The menus of the Bayou Glò Pro
My mother was very sorry.
I'm going to go to the bathroom and drink some water right now.
The child is born at the right time.
They gave me a tank of water and water in the room.
I've had a lot of good friends in my life.
The good news is that I'm not going anywhere.
It's not like I don't have enough water.
The children's epitome is to hear the singing of a song.
I told you about my mother.
A thousand teeth jans make me sing sing a
Val for a ton of water.
But the children of the river I sing tezen
On my friend's side.
A good friend of mine.
There's a teaspoon of water.
I don't know what to do.
The child can drink a glass of water.
Even mothers who need a fish or water supply need it.
I'll try to make it hard for you to stand up for me.
It's very difficult for children to be able to stand up for themselves.
This is the best way to get to Fiyat.
I can stand it.
The price is now before I can make a phone call to the children to meet them.
You are a good friend of mine.
I've been waiting for you in Bonzanmi, I've been waiting for you in Bonzanmi.
You're going to have to do something about it.
I'm going to take a few dollars.
Children are more like a prale.
The black man is on the floor of the mouchwa branch.
They told me how to find them.
In this case, you will be charged a grade 3 tax.
If I die, for example, we'll be taxed and we won't know.
When most of the people who were there were killed, Gonk, the guy, was dead.
Since the camp started, I've created animals, I've created animals, I've created animals, I've created animals, I've created animals, I've created animals, I've created animals, I've created animals, I've created animals, I've created animals, I've created animals, I've created animals, I've created animals, I've created animals, I've created animals, I've created animals, I've created animals, I've created animals, I've created animals, I've created animals, I
My father's mother gave me water, and I went to fish, and I cooked and cooked.
I'm coming for you now.
I can't drink wine and I can't eat meat.
I'll tell you now before I go to the bathroom.
They're no longer able to use the water before.
I can't wait to hear the song.
You are a good friend of mine.
You're the only one who can help me.
Ayzenmwen Te gen nan water bonz anmi Mwen
Ayzenmwen Fyi is singing a song about fishing.
I sing I sing I sing I sing I pawet fish an Fyi alakay li and re l angel
with rainwater.
I've come to the conclusion that I can't do anything right now.
chante lap tezen lap tezen
A good friend of mine is ice cream.
I am descended from the great-granddaughter of my mother.
One day they're going to have to drink a latte.
It's like stealing a gun from a neighborhood.
I've been waiting for you to tell me.
The time has come for you to come to me.
It's time for me to get rid of them all.
This is how I'm going to do the same thing I want to do next.
Two shirts are available for purchase.
Detan sa epi epi detan sa epi
The commander of the wine is at rest.
I've already passed them on.
A sheep with a sheep's tail.
They're not even going to steal a sheep again.
They've got a lot of sheep.
I'm going to have to go with Van Nan Mouton.
When I was a kid, I was a kid and I was a kid.
Li leve al lave triplay nou on grivyè and rele
And then I'm going to investigate to find the lost Mouton.
Jovini then asked Tifi what she was doing.
Typically, this is the case.
I'm from Tifi.
I'm so glad my dad is here.
There is no such thing as a man's law, and there is no such thing as a man's law, and there is no such thing as a thief's law.
It's been that way ever since.
It's easier to understand than it is to understand.
It's time to change the language.
I'm going to get my dad's boots.
This is how they changed the language.
They told my dad.
It's more than enough.
They are retired.
Detan his wife's own ap flow in the faith of your boss.
Langòdi has changed the head of the la yo tani Non papa
I'm the chief of staff.
My father's father.
It's either this way or the way it is.
You're my father.
I'm the chief of staff.
I don't know how to make wine with sheep.
The chief of the army is the son of Manti.
I've never seen anything like this before.
My dad didn't want to wash me in a sheep's milk.
I'm going to retake it.
The men's father with all the sheep and goats in their mouths.
I don't know what I can do to get my dad and I to take him out of here.
This is an anbouch li.
It's the first time they've done it.
Malchansporté is always on the same page.
They're going to have to come up with a new way of doing things.
I don't know how I'm going to get my mom to come in here without her.
They're my mother.
I'm sure you'll want to see the men upstairs.
The mother of the epi
I passed my coubo Kande maman machou actifya nou machou actifya sou konn machou a desan m chodi a ti ti edi femme de l'eau.
I know what I'm talking about.
I've got a lot to say about it.
Nor is it your wife and Mary's husband.
Detanl, maryavek is a woman, she has a great sense of humor, she has a great sense of humor.
It's not like they're going to be able to fix it.
I'm going to send a message or take a picture.
They were taken from the vineyard.
They're taking it with a grain of salt.
They took the banann banann.
And the wife, resignation or not, because the husband is the wife, and she wants to be the grandmother of the one, the only thing she has.
The whole world is dead.
Jiane Yon is dead.
My husband and I are dead.
Yonmi Yonmi is dead.
You're not going to die.
You're going to die because you're going to die.
It is Messye Bon Sijan Pyè.
He is the son of Mr. Bon Sijan Pyè.
I don't know if I've been able to do that since then.
Don't know what to do with your money.
Or a village or a town in the whole area.
Or grandmse debate or know or can tell a new story.
How much do you know?
You've got four brothers.
I'm going to have to get up and do my job.
I'll call you one last time.
I'm going to call you back yesterday.
I'm going to give you a break.
The other one is called the mountain briz yo
I'm going to call the other one.
Passivity has come to you.
Take a guy who knows other people's power.
Pasriviyè Aske can find water only yo
Now you're on your own.
Yo pral lanmwa chouk djè yo tout
They're doing the right thing.
They're going to make money.
I've got a plan.
I'll give you some salt.
I'm going to tell you about it.
Well, let's talk about Flemish, Flemish, and Brizmontay living in your own country.
yatren yatarak yo triye a
I'm going to try to find the right people.
It's my first day of school and it's my first day of school.
It's been a while since we've had a day off.
It's not your fault.
Do it now
I'm doing it now.
I've been waiting for this to happen.
I'm a grown man and I'm an adult.
I'm going to do the same thing.
I'm going to do it now.
It's not your brother's fault.
I'm just doing this right now.
That's what I'm talking about.
I'm going to do it now.
They took the feudal couvets and moved them.
Adults are more likely to be overweight or obese.
Let's go now or then, let's go now.
Yo bon kay wòch
Against the grain.
It's good to be back in the store.
It's very costly.
La yon desanm yo rize: Kote w
I'm in the middle of something.
I'm a grown man and I'm a winner.
Li maje ak on bre en bad.
I'm going to take a step back.
We're going to break the mountain to get to know the first one.
Ap brize m ap pase m
I'll take you as soon as I run or as soon as I take someone else.
Or as a wife.
You may want to stay in the same place as the others.
I'm going to try again.
They're coming when it's time.
Let's get to know each other.
They are now l...
They don't do miracles.
I don't know what I can do.
I am alive and well.
The people of this country are very proud of themselves.
They've got a lot to do with it.
li granpe m al.
If you don't want to put it on or off, epi.
They don't want to do that anymore.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about right now.
Is there anything I can say for you?
They're still sleeping now.
They're not too busy.
They're now wearing a mouson in my neck of the woods.
I don't know how much money I'm going to put in the money.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to keep up with the pitch.
The three trains are still in operation.
They're in the middle of nowhere.
The same can be said of me at the end of the day.
Who are the great men of God today?
On the plate, you can see it.
It's the only way.
I'm not sure about that.
He is the father of Bablal.
My dogs are entering my house.
They're already dead.
I've come a long way from being a fool.
I can't wait to get to the end of the car.
They are looking at the end of the car.
Now you're going to take a look at it.
The gene sequence is determined by the gene sequence.
They took the knife from me.
I've come across them and I've seen them.
There is a potential for improvement.
I'm going to tell you about them.
They're going to end up with a lot of money.
They are now in my arms.
I'm going to have a drink and I'm going to have dinner.
I'm not going to say anything.
I met you there.
I'm in the second generation.
I'm sure you're right, but I'm sure you're right.
The man who had come to Pwonm, who had come to the garden, went to Beth, and said, Come, come.
How old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how old are you, how
Whether you like it or not.
I'm going to tell you all about it.
Everything is all new.
The whole thing is new.
It's the birthday of the world now.
I'm going to take a look at some of them.
I'm going to bring it to you.
They put me on the stand and put me on the stand.
Atatimoun yo you, understand zonbon bay yo peel, konp ap azanm.
Dad, take your mouth off a couch and sit down.
In saving if you can give a new desyat where I will win
They're going to get their hands dirty.
My grandmother's grandmother was in the car.
Do you want me to be perfect for you, do you want me to be stupid, do you want me to be stupid?
My dad is a bout kwaz.
Li di bout kwaz lan, li di katay, li di bout kwaz born man devwa.
Or at least don't worry about it.
ey w video tan an Se rally lasispad
Take a look at the results of the survey.
This is the one who is saditi live vòn kay a..
Manen yon la a
There's only one fight they can win.
They know they're going to be born in the middle of nowhere.
Al pran m banman a.
They don't know how long it will take to make the world a better place.
There are seven worlds.
I don't know what to do about it.
They know how to deal with it.
Yo koutigè, a, se pa l't you come out this way I tanp zanm zanm, ranje, ranje, kade toupe a to.
Pass it by, the lion of the ox, the leaf of the lamb, the lamb of the lamb, the lamb of the lamb, the lamb of the lamb, the lamb of the lamb, the lamb of the lamb.
Te gen Konpè Tig, Kayi yo te te may prese friends Tig bef, li is Tig bef, loll ale, li is Tig bef.
Or to hear the old man's voice, now I'm with you.
I'm not sure about Monchè.
I'm trying to get to the bottom of it.
men al ap redven
I'm going to tell you something and you're going to tell me something.
and Kifev.
Men can do what they can.
For the sake of completeness, let's not forget that we've been there before.
I'm going to tell you anon.
They're his wife.
What's the matter with you?
I'm going to check it out.
I'm going to try to make a soup.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
My men were able to do it.
It's a very short time.
It's time to move on.
Ekoutan tit boukante kabann with Tibèv
Tibèv al nan kabann pa a.
It's what you do.
Levi's is a trio.
It's just a matter of time before we do it.
You are passing through the grain of rice.
It's the only thing I've ever seen.
It's a great way to get to know each other.
I don't know what to do.
They took me on my feet.
It's all in your head.
They're going to have to come up with a solution.
Mikès Sotisson has been running the account.
It's time to take a break.
You're not going to be able to do that again.
Everything is new.
We're going to have to find a way to stop it.
I'm not sure if I've ever heard of it.
Men of the New
It's a good book.
I'm going to run a ticket.
men or take good care of them.
They're not here yet.
There are four of them.
Or should I wash one of the debts?
Now that we have come to the city, we shall be driven out of the city, and we shall be driven out of the city of Odem.
So who's upstairs?
Li tig chon nanm ki know how to get up as
They're looking for a shortcut.
They're looking for me.
I'm going to tell you a few good things.
I'm sure they'll be back in the next few weeks.
There is no such thing as a tick diot.
You know what I mean.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything about it.
It's not about you.
So much so that I've decided to go for it.
It is derived from the leaves of the bouk kenl bayali.
They're going to have to do something else.
They are typical of teenagers.
Pa san k baba e pa moun sourit
I'm going to sleep.
Blak Fil Blak Conprè Cabrit is working in his wife's office.
Etanl in the work of Moun Api li video kabrit wou epi epi
Kabrit won kay li run and te ladye Li re
Iwan n se kay Tig
It's a trifecta and a trifecta.
It's the only way to get rid of them.
I don't want to go to work.
I've seen a lot of videos about myself.
I can tell you why I'm here.
It's not like you're going to be able to do it.
Anken, British even know that there is no such thing as a woman, a man is a woman, a man is a freak.
An fwon ti can sing in Mwayèt
It's like a crocodile soup.
The average forest income is m
Ap fwon ti sing.
The key is to make sure that you're doing the right thing.
It's the same as E.
Frèdi and Manse passed through my soul today.
I'm going to sing a song for you.
What is it or isn't it?
I'm going to sit down, I'm going to sit down, bro.
You come to me, from here to there, my brothers come to me, my brothers come to me, my brothers come to me, my brothers come to me, my brothers come to me, my brothers come to me, my brothers come to me, my brothers come to me, my brothers come to me, my brothers come to me, my brothers come to me, my brothers come to me, my brothers come to me, my brothers come to me, my brothers come to me.
It's time for you to kill the distig.
Today I'm going to kill Kat and I'm going to school.
The two members of the cabrit are smiling pen.
I'm going to kill the distig.
If you're going to kill me, I'm going to kill you.
I'm going to kill fourteen people.
You're smiling because you're smiling.
They know you.
Yes, I'm sure you'll find the wine.
I can't wait to see what happens next.
I'm going to kill this Jòdi al ap kill kat and for fourteen Vi kontan kol du se Yen
Tyranny of wine in the time of the Tigwòg for the sake of abrit
I'm not going back in time.
It's a bit of a struggle.
It's a great way to get people to drink wine.
There are two types of ticks and a large number of ticks.
wife of a tiger.
My wife came back.
I'm going to make two wine glasses.
You're going to be a crazy person.
We're going to start a new school.
The school is located in Shenzhen, China.
This book will allow me to go through the bottom of my pan.
Omilye Michey is not here.
I'm going to kill them!
Yo sile, yo sile te gwoou, tik pa konnak etik other li djop, kabrik pran ka la.
There is no combat.
Nal te gen flora of the body.
There is double the same number of people who pass through the door.
It's time to move on.
Now, you know, you've got a lot of other things going on, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too, too
People from his room.
The next day I fell into the room and saw the Blue Room in my bed.
He gave his wife the right to do so.
I'm going to keep the men.
It's not like anyone knows who you are.
The grease is not dying.
It's not that simple.
I came here to tell my wife that I hadn't done anything wrong before.
It's not like it's going to fall off.
Or a guy or a person who can pass a dibout in it.
Katre and Matre.
Since then, I've known my husband and wife for a long time, and I've known them since I was a neighbor.
When you're done, you're behind the wheel!
You're going to end up with the last thing you want to do.
I'm going to buy a new one.
All the saints have been lost.
I have lost my life and now I know that I have never lost my life.
If you don't, you should still be alive.
When I tell you that I'm going to kill you for someone, I tell you everything, I tell you everything, I tell you everything.
If you leave your luggage, you'll have a drink for the people, and you'll live.
It's not about papab.
If you're against the menmet ta then.
Win your wife's life.
I'm not going to lie to you.
I'm so tired of wine.
More than my dad
aspab ap bi ap gitswiy with plot tan yo
Aspab even dev peye or li
I asked for a pass.
If a man's wife is in need of him because I'm taking the tifize for the same ton of potatoes.
I'm very happy with it.
I'll find out when you want it to happen.
I'm going to have to pass.
Men are not equal to men.
So, let's just say, I know I'm going to pass you men, and I'm going to do it or I'm going to do it again.
I'll be too much ahead of the curve.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it through.
Or you don't know when something else will happen.
Or if you know where you're coming from or what you're doing.
Kot or koubit.
or even derived from the activity of asiburab
Now you've got to go back to the drawing board.
The gravity of the fanba is that it is fat even in the same gen tanm nou ye avèm.
The mankou di listen to the koubi
The result is that you can't take it easy.
I'd like to go to the top of the world on a moon like this.
In the meantime, I'm going to take one more man and I'm going to kill him.
If you can't, you're going to die.
I'm going to die with my kids on the train.
Come on, and you'll be all right.
You've given up having children so that you don't know what you're doing wrong.
The children of the same generation.
It's not like I'm going to make a mistake, it's like I'm going to make a mistake, it's not like I'm going to make a mistake.
This is the second generation.
You know what I mean by Gen 2
I'm not going to run.
I'm going to run the lobby.
Men who run away from the door prefer to walk away from the door or know that the door can be demoted.
I don't think they're going to fall.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything about it, but I'm going to be able to do something about it, and I'm not going to be able to do anything about it.
At any time, if you can't get a new one, I'll get a new one.
I can't stop the rache completely.
I'm also new to Elans for the voice of another man.
Y jouz Ebè sa nou pat gen m, good record café zanat café a te.
Now, there's no such thing.
Kraze, pass or two.
Or two of them.
If you're not there, you're not going to be able to find a laptop.
Now we're defining you completely.
Passing through the top of the ladder, the leaves of the pepouse fall.
Since the fall of the leafy pepouse laplya ap laplya
If men can make a statement, they can make a statement.
After the good I am happy I am satisfied with my qualifications.
Now you see a good one piston la
It's a good idea for me.
I'm not a fan of you.
This is the third time I've done this.
I'm very happy with what I've done.
I'm not a wine bougrenmisi.
Oh, and if I do, do you know where you're going with my bougrenmisi?
I don't want to do anything for you, but I want to do it because of my experience or what I've done.
To make use of a child's canvas and now an agent of a person's life.
How do you live with the current situation?
Are the two the same thing or even?
I'm going to be pleased.
It's the one you're looking for.
I'm not sure who you are.
You're a great adult and you're going to be a great teacher.
It's all about people.
This is the point of the old man again.
I'm going to be pleased.
I'm going to tell you about my grandmother's grandmother.
I'm going to take care of it.
The men are all a.
And then there's the question of people.
Take it easy on yourself.
You don't know who you are or what you're going to get.
I'm a breath of fresh air.
Don't be like this person.
We're not here to help.
I don't know where I'm going.
Who's coming?
It's a bit of a pain.
There are no gaps.
It's not the same thing with you.
It's a great way to get to know your grandmother.
Now you're ready to move on.
of great height.
It's the first time I've seen it.
Now I know what I'm talking about.
Lais is able to use the other allwit e.
Let's go on strike.
Before you know it, I'm going to tell you.
They're still very much a part of who they are.
Well, here's another fwab, thank you, thank you, okay, man I'm going to see.
If you're a good person, you're a good person, you're a good person, you're a good person, you're a good person, you're a good person, you're a good person, you're a good person, you're a good person, you're a good person, you're a good person, you're a good person, you're a good person, you're a good person, you're a good person, you're a good person, you're a good person, you're a good person
Man, man, dress as a wife.
I'm going to give you a little bit of advice, and I'm going to give you a little bit of advice.
men according to their righteousness.
Men are also welcome to attend.
They came to the rescue.
They replied that they had a problem.
The second one I directed.
I have a heavenly son and a woman to talk to.
The first prize is a prize.
If you come to me, I may not come to you.
They're going to drink wine with him.
In the third place.
It's all about the kids.
They'll be there until the end of March.
They're coming from me.
They say it's a lot of fun.
What do you think of your wife?
I can't help but wonder.
I'm going to play football.
I'm in the middle of something.
They're in the middle of nowhere.
Are there any good movies in which the children of men are alive?
She said, "My wife, Menbonwi, but she's not going to make it.
I'm not even going to fall in love with a young woman.
He said, "Don't be too young for love.
I'm with you.
There's a lot more to it than that.
A lifetime of vinyl poses with l
I'm going to spend the rest of the day with each other.
I've come to terms with the fact that he's a bad guy.
I've been living with this guy for a long time.
The couche with the couch.
Li mayan wine
They're like this.
I'd rather spend more time with janyan sauce than renmakou in color.
OK, when I get there, the guy from Kouchyavek is on his car.
The man and his brother are lovers, and I live with you, and I live with you, and I live with you, and I live with you, and I live with you, and I love you, and I love you, and I love you, and I love you, and I love you, and I love you, and I love you, and I love you, and I love you, and I love you, and I love you, and I love you, and I love you, and I love you, and I love you, and I love you, and I love you.
You can't do that.
Men and Menmou brothers.
Chikaou Tafi is a wine made from two grapes and Chika is a wine made from the same grape.
It's not like it's your mother's fault.
Chika Tafi's men have been drinking wine for two years.
What I'm saying is that I'm the only one who can do it.
And you're the mother of the guy who's got a phone in his pocket.
Li keve li mom, then li mom, then li mom can get them to get a cell head on their backs and mouths.
Ni pasyon kouto lanvant li
They'll take it easy when I get there.
Li soap brother li powder brother li pull all the charm of the feet brother l
I'm going to take my brother and his wife with me tomorrow.
Or at the very least, they're not going to be able to win.
Bite lan kay and his brother li.
That's all there is to it.
Well, OK, or are we going to do something else?
I'm very good at other things.
Is it the sea or the sea?
Well, if your mom always sends you a month to say goodbye.
When the water comes down, people like to flood, but they still cry.
Bonzan mi mwen, wa zan, tezen, o!
Bonzan is my friend.
This is the first time I've done this.
The tezen appeared li Yon bond gold self-portraits enli bay mat enyenfi a epi when mom arrives
My mother didn't tell me to bring water or water.
He said, "Mother of all your friends, I can come back again, my mother will come back to me with tears in my eyes".
Ever since I was a kid, I've been on the road.
Balouti is not a bad thing.
My mother told me that I was going to send her to him.
This is how I got to the top of the mountain.
The man in the bag knows he's got a machine in his pocket.
Okay, if it comes to your head, I'm going to look at the bag and I'm going to know what's in it.
Tezen, oh, my good friend, my dear friend, Tezen, oh, my dear friend, my dear friend, Tezen, and tears, my dear friend.
They came to me and made a provision for a man to return to his country.
Ever since I saw myself singing, I've been singing and crying.
Everything is going to come out of the closet.
They cry out for help when it comes to showing up.
I'm going to grab a coffee and make you feel better every day.
I'm going to have coffee every day and I'm going to have a good time.
I arrived at the coffee shop every day and went up the Alps and down to Bondi.
Gros sèv ap descending in the men's tee
They put together contracheves and headed for it.
It's down to the bottom of things.
No one knows.
This is how you come to know that I'm on your side forever.
So Manmon and I had to come.
The brothers came to visit.
I made glass of wine.
Before they came, they did it to me, they came now, they saw it for my dad, they gave it to me.
Now I'm with you.
And now you're here.
Ap papa now
The app is now available
It's not like Oh.
It's easy to get lost in your system.
I can't wait for the next one to come.
Now I'm here to help.
Everything is fine now.
The people who want to destroy it all because they know it's there.
The brothers and sisters who come, they are the same, they are the same.
Papa al vini, papa l lave bouch li, tears are good, water is good, water is good, water is good.
One tip of such a net is a a a a
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
There's no way I'm going to make it.
I'm going to have to pay my dues.
A pa, pa, pa, pa, pa, listen, listen, listen, or sound the bell.
When they are young, they sing when they are young, and when they are young, they sing when they are young, and when they are young, they sing when they are young.
I met your mother and I met your mother and I didn't want to talk to you.
They're already on the verge of collapse.
Everything is already in place.
Dad's debts are already there.
They put their hands on each other so that they can get the best out of it.
Keep them in your pocket.
I've been waiting for you.
chak jenmi yo grand ouvè
I'm not a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman.
I've been waiting for you to come back.
I've always wanted to be a woman.
I've always been attracted to women.
I thought I was a woman of the beast.
WI, I'm the beast.
WI, I've been the beast of the maden and the woman of the maden.
This is the union name.
It's all about your soul.
I've come to the conclusion that I can't live without you.
I'm going to tell my dad that he's not going to be able to keep up with me.
He was baptized and became a Christian.
Yo pote now baptize a pote tout vil
My grandfather was baptized and baptized with the Holy Spirit.
It's a waste of money.
The month of Pavwam
It's the grey part.
It's been a long time since I've been on the road, and I've been on my mother's side of the family.
Mary and my dad are the only ones.
Marilie is alone with her mother.
Don't go through the laziness.
Gandjab, like many other cities in the world, is a very popular club.
The balls of the hand are made by the hands of the men.
Gandjab is the same as Kashmir.
I don't know how many times I've been on the internet.
It's a beautifully decorated mansion.
It's my mom's voice, and my dad's at work in the afternoon, and my mom's at the prom now.
You are the tip of the iceberg, you are the tip of the iceberg, you are the tip of the iceberg, you are the tip of the iceberg, you are the tip of the iceberg, you are the tip of the iceberg, you are the tip of the iceberg, you are the tip of the iceberg, you are the tip of the iceberg, you are the tip of the iceberg.
My husband and I went to his mother's house.
My money is going to go to my dad.
The level of Marivel passes through the lalin
They may be paid by their mother.
They are open to the public.
They are now a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a
Vandjab is hearing her mother's voice very well.
There's a lot of people out there who can do that.
It's been a long time coming.
It's a great way to get to know your mommy.
I was born at the age of three.
They're trying to console their mother.
Mari li solatil papa Mari li pelli pase solè
Mary's hair is shiny.
Pitit lakond, if mother, teach, listen, help.
I've never heard of it, Gandjab is pop, I've heard of it, I've seen it, I've seen it, I've seen it, I've seen it, I've seen it, I've seen it, I've seen it, I've seen it, I've seen it, I've seen it, I've seen it, I've seen it, I've seen it, I've seen it, I've seen it, I've seen it, I've seen it, I've seen
When my mother, Gouki yo i ap timalis is now there.
Look at the coast of Mali.
Malis had to kill his mother.
That's why I'm giving them a code.
I'm going to put an end to Pavis.
I put them on hold.
They put their mother's mother's hand on them.
I have heard the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice, the voice.
I'll tell you what, if anything, I'm going to listen to it.
That's right, yeah.
Now we have a third generation.
They're even better than you.
It's better to come out of the closet than to go to sleep.
If they do a series of descriptions, they can make people feel good about themselves.
I'm still here with you, I know you love me.
I'm with you, even if you are with me, I'm not a slave to you, I'm a slave to everything.
Let's hear it for you.
I'm sure you'll be able to use it again, but I'm sure you'll be able to use it again and again.
They make me feel like I'm on my way, like a flashing lamp.
And for the sake of men, I'm going to walk on them.
The human body is not in the same water as the human body.
There are a few that are full of blanks.
I've got a basel li and a soul mate.
They're easy to recognize because they're animals.
And before you know it, there's a lot to do.
There is no such thing as a free lunch, and there is no such thing as a free lunch.
If you know where you're going, it's easier for you to walk.
The two feet were topped, but not, allowing them to walk more easily than Zègin.
Gen 2 won't be able to do anything like this.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm going to fly.
You're behind me, or you're behind me, or you're behind me, or you're behind me, or you're behind me, or you're behind me, or you're behind me, or you're behind me, or you're behind me, or you're behind me, or you're behind me, or you're behind me, or you're behind me, or you're behind me, or you're behind me, or you're behind me, or you're behind me, or you're behind me, or
This makes them easier to recognize.
It's because they're in the middle of a school that looks like a cottage.
Yon kwovye lè doub
I would never have seen anyone who knew the story of how it came to be.
There are people who don't know how to talk to you.
I don't want to kill you.
So, it's nice to hear that you're not alone.
Well, if you know what you're talking about, you're going to get it.
Mwen gen woun, men, yon beast men, longen.
I don't know what to do with myself right now.
So take your bef savann nan nou gen rapye l
I'm ready now for the big game.
I know the color of a gen
I'm here to help you.
I'm here to help you.
A kiss is clear again.
Pa ble l.
Blue digo, blue fonse, blue sky.
Kouvè is a left-handed batsman.
Mèt ban mann for chief anmen, mèt ban mann, people an men rete li.
There is no such thing as a zero, there is no such thing as a zero, there is no such thing as a zero, there is no such thing as a zero, there is no such thing as a zero, there is no such thing as a zero, there is no such thing as a zero, there is no such thing as a zero, there is no such thing as a zero, there is no such thing as a zero, there is no such thing as a zero, there is no such thing as a zero, there is no such thing as a zero.
How do you know?
Eee, the gene, the kouj gene.
Or, oh, no touléry, but pol lam, and violet, well, violet.
It's the first time in my life that I've been able to do this.
There's a lot of evidence to prove that I'm a good person.
Di zansye trayizan
I'm going to use Woz.
I don't know what to say.
I want you to know that I'm here.
Gen m blan or gen m blan
You can't take it from below.
or mete wouj
I want you to know.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do this before I get married.
Or can I start or win men as soon as possible?
Gatsose, are you going to put a bye all the way to the bottom of the ladder?
Because you're the only one who can win.
It's where you win the next few days.
There are some differences.
They're eating you right in front of them.
Deyak pale, lèpre jana, Onba a, or k ap di an, you two l tan la, yo renn pran di an tootan.
Onbe tan tim, and congratulations.
I'm one of those people who's got a way with me.
Creole or Creole
or creole for the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake of the sake
For the sake of my family, I'm here to help you.
The man or the woman is dead.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
For example, Coke fil la an lankta me
The men of Pan fil la an an le a
I'm sure you'll be able to use it with me.
On other Sundays, for example, when people go to the bathroom, they go to the bathroom.
I'm going to go to church.
I'm going to go to church and I'm going to church and I'm going to church and I'm going to church and I'm going to church and I'm going to church and I'm going to church and I'm going to church and I'm going to church and I'm going to church and I'm going to church and I'm going to church and I'm going to church and I'm going to church and I'm going to church and I'm going to church and I'm going to church and I'm going to
You can do everything you need to do in the church.
After the end of the day, I'm done.
It was last November.
There is no way to buy or sell a hotel.
But there are other animals I know who have been killed by Legiza to stand up and come to me for a ride.
If you are a child, you will not be able to do this as an adult.
Or what's going on in the demesis?
Just as before Man and
It's the first time I've done it.
lavè y al church
How do you know what's going on?
Gen confesyon , le gen demon , li te observi nan devliz , many daka mari .
Yon lalad, yon radeyò a, li pasya ten soven, y al relayed for twelve bali, bal kisa?
The last Nobel laureate was San Krenman.
There are also people who are more likely to die in the cemetery than they are to die in the cemetery.
In the meantime, I'll be able to talk to the people who are behind me, and I'll tell you what to do next.
Are you ready to go?
In the morning, can you tell us how many days it will be like to celebrate your birthday?
This is how it is to be born, this is how it is to be born, this is how it is to be born, this is how it is to be born, this is how it is to be born, this is how it is to be born, this is how it is to be born, this is how it is to be born, this is how it is to be born, this is how it is to be born, this is how it is to be born, this is how it is to be born.
You're going to tell Jeremiah to come, aren't you?
Men, do you not know how to celebrate, as Rome celebrates legliz sen sa, and do you not know how to celebrate chan tèt te?
Wi, anme lè yon men, pa t monay.
Mwen lòt non fèt pawas tou
I'm not born on the other side of the world.
A man and a woman who are like a swallow can be a part of a man's life and a part of a man's life.
God forbid or I won't do it again.
I'm going to the bay.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I'm not going to lie to you.
I'm a man of many talents.
The people who serve God in this way are doing well.
The Lord's Prayer is a daily prayer.
What are we going to do about it?
Or I know a potestan, or I can see a potestan, or I can see a potestan, or I can see a caterpillar, or I can see a caterpillar, or I can see a caterpillar, or I can see a caterpillar, or I can see a caterpillar, or I can see a caterpillar, or I can see a caterpillar, or I can see a caterpillar, or I can see a caterpillar, or I can see a caterpillar.
Or, when that person arrives, he will cry out to them and they will come to the church.
We're not going to kill anyone.
If you're going to order an anpan, Granmet, if you're going to order a good anman.
There are two types of heat pumps.
There are two thermal springs.
The Geden people are on the potestan
There's nothing else to do with this network.
They are here, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are there, they are
Religious knowledge can be used to generate a sense of belonging.
Gang sa odinman
I don't want to say anything about my religion.
Don't tell people that you can't do a lot of things that you can't do.
Let's do something about it.
I'm going to get rid of them.
Ganga sa ak onnme on bann mann, ap ye toutan blan kon with li.
Do it like I'm singing and I'm taking you answering for you to connect me to you, whoever you are.
I don't know how to handle a sikanzo nou, wi.
Well, you're not going to be the leader of the pack, you're going to be the leader of the pack, you're going to be the leader of the pack, you're going to be the leader of the pack, you're going to be the leader of the pack.
After the chance of a baby being born, the baby will be born.
Kijanman is a child, but he is himself.
You're outside of the room.
It's not about men, it's about people.
Li also ap mache bay the people of lanmen
They're just trying to figure out what's going on.
Behind the gen trimesters, the men of the tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-monthly tri-month
If you speak, but the person, even the person who speaks, even the person who speaks, is called the person who speaks.
You know who you're talking to.
I'm not going to tell you anything like that.
I'm like a man of my dreams.
It's been so long since I've been here.
You've got a lot of people.
You're on a mission for the people.
Fighting with Ben isn't easy.
For the third time in a row, we're not even talking about it.
The key to the accounting system is that the people who are in the process of applying and applying are themselves in the Chwal.
It is all about everything.
What kind of people do you think I'm going to be?
How many of these people will I be able to find?
There are two types of people who are just like the old ones.
There's a lot of fonsey de stuff.
Men are so far away from my home.
Men have to go through it.
Men are going to go through it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it or not.
It's where I'm sitting on my lap.
There are many ways to do this.
I can't help but wonder what I'm doing here.
That's all there is to it, wow.
Yes, Peristi la.
It's kind of like being in the middle.
The next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next day, the next
I'm going to do something about Vivonni's birthday.
One of them is the same person.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to do it.
It's like they're not there.
It's not like I'm in the middle of something.
Keep them in your pocket.
I don't know if you'll be able to take pictures of me.
They are friends of Kay's.
Gen of people, gen of people, gen of people plus gen of people.
Gen Ganga is able to make a living out of it.
You can't do anything that you don't want to do.
I was able to do it.
Yon pasye tout gen service pa yo.
If you want to see it, you're not going to be able to see it.
It's better than the others.
I'm not going to drink it.
It's very quiet.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
M pa kapte l
I can take you with me.
It's like a tifan for a tifan.
Well, on the things I know, on the things I know, on the things I have.
I'm sure you'll find a way to get back to your story.
Gen yon nefek wonti Kalbas.
I have two souls in my body, but I don't have everything in my body.
If you don't want to do that, you can't do that.
What do you want to buy?
I want to be able to do what I want to do.
The two men who fell asleep were not able to express themselves.
It's good to be able to get the most out of what you're looking for.
When the gas comes to debay a se, yo te otro te, yo del Boche, li fankou anti Kalbas se gen an se yon debay lan.
It's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there, it's there.
Riku an soup debay ek an sa ladanm, tou bakou lasi Boche, kijan, Boche.
So, tap or so when you win, like a gang and when you win, you can't make a sound.
Such as la siyat?
La Del Melodic decked them in a courtyard with their laden school.
Is it a good idea to get rid of them?
or know where to go from here.
I can't lose you again.
It's not easy being green.
There is no other way to get back to the point of departure.
You are the only one who can sing.
There are many things I've been thinking about.
That's what I've been eating.
And I'm sure you'll be able to give us an opportunity to give everyone the right to know if they're going to take it.
I can't wait to get to it.
You're going to have to do something about it or you're going to have to do something about it.
They are often considered lazy.
They are well equipped for the same task.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
They've been pushed to the brink of extinction.
And if you want to do something like this, you can live where you want to live.
That's how I'm going to make a lounge.
Pijan releases it as an admonition to me.
Is there an order of genius again?
But you've got a lot to learn.
If the person is in the third trimester of the year, they will be in the third trimester of the year.
Konn gen de people tak wfis yo tou
I know you have two colors.
I know there are a few who don't like it.
It's a phone call from someone who's sick.
It's been a decade since Mademoiselle's death.
Madem sa anis
I know of a generation.
Gende yon men
This is the first edition of Men Against Children.
I'm going to tell you a lot of things.
I'm so grateful to you.
I don't even know what else to do.
I'm not going to say thank you very much.
I'm going to tell you about it.
A person like la
A lot of people have a lot in common with their apparel.
From people to people.
There is no such thing as a new generation of people.
I know I've heard a lot about you.
They're in the garden.
They're in the cabal.
They don't understand grinizanmi or anything like that.
We didn't have any luggage.
Kou ta gen men nay evanm byen yo, San Babizouyen Gèspeyè kòb yo, anke gen non, Malsite.
San Bako or not?
ooy men no
They're just like that.
Men don't have to work for a clean slate.
I'm going to do a little bit of chewing gum.
I'm not sure.
I'm so excited, I'm so excited for my grandmother, Santa Bezwin, and I'm so excited to be on the market for myself.
Either way, we don't know what to do.
It hurts me.
What kind of field is there to retire, koujou an rele bay zalif?
Do you know how many times I'm going to tell you about it?
It's a good network, isn't it?
There is only one of them, Zeb, Leraje.
I'm with you all the time.
That's why people don't talk about prices.
The guy from Fiyavini me men an sa.
If this is true, or if magic is true of me, can I ever, Dad, put an end to this?
That's what I'm going to do.
It's like you're against a bunch of things.
You're not going to be able to do it.
They can't do anything about it.
Nanmout as if you're doing something big or on your shoulders, or on your knees.
So, you're the one who's going to take care of Didi, the one who's going to take care of you.
Neoliyen Jan Gwi, you too are passionate about answering my questions, aren't you?
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to make it back to the office.
Okay, that's a good one.
What, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what,
I've never been with my grandmother before.
I've come to the conclusion that I can't afford to lose weight.
I'm going to go to the monsoon cabinet in December.
At the end of the road is the road.
The men are men.
Why are we doing this?
I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I greet you, I
E, do you have money, and how do you get your money's worth?
Are you ready to meet me or, Mari?
I can't wait to release one person.
Manza is a friend of yours?
The people who brought it with them.
They're going to help.
livi sanvi m
li sanvi If i'm going to ride this man
Vi di vin men pale w.
You need to be able to get the most out of your life if you can't get it.
I'm not going to be able to ride.
They even had a gun.
It can be m.
My wine, my ball, my chah if I want to fill it.
I'm going to give you a break.
I want to buy something.
There is no money in the bag.
Now I'm going to do the same thing or I'm going to do the same thing.
That's why I'm here.
such as la m te o ben san do la
I'm going to do the same thing.
Ready or not?
If you don't know what it is, you can't know what it is, you can't know what it is, you can't know what it is, you can't know what it is, you can't know what it is, you can't know what it is, you can't know what it is, you can't know what it is, you can't know what it is, you can't know what it is, you can't know what it is, you can't know what it is.
I'm going to tell you about it.
Or how or why do you take the consent of the person in question?
They're going to have a gas leak.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
It's a little behind the scenes.
There are many rooms that are good for you.
I've been living in the same house ever since I was born.
What's the point of this?
Since the beginning of the world, when did the first man die, when did the seventh man die?
But then, when I was a teenager, I started thinking about it, and I started thinking about it, and I started thinking about it, and I started thinking about it.
I know I'm worth something else, but I know I'm going to retire you.
I know it's tough.
I know I've told you so many times.
Lot's legs, of course, were given to you by someone else's legs.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
This means that the end result is as good as the end result or the end result is as good as the end result.
I'm very happy with my life.
With now or in the future?
Now I'm seven feet from where?
A person who is willing and able to contribute to another's goals for a given year.
There's always another one, or maybe I'll find another one.
Aposan bay zook lou
I've been waiting for you.
I'm sure you'll be pleased with it.
There is no one in the bay of zanpenkou
A man is a man, a man is a man, a man is a man, a man is a man, a man is a man, a man is a man, a man is a man, a man is a man, a man is a man, a man is a man, a man is a man, a man is a man, a man is a man, a man is a man.
Pa zanp eken tansouye yo sou twa pies like la
The depot has been vacant since then.
It's not like we didn't know.
Moun fanbri, fanbri, eparele lòb is antho, they know other bal non ankon, yo dec masculine cha a a, masculine bouzen, bouzen.
It's all about people.
Talk or anything I'm going to do.
on who I'm talking to.
I'm going to eat tea.
I'm going to tell you who I'm going to be.
I'm going to march.
I don't want to make a record of my birthday.
These people, if they go too far in the past, then someone who is going too far in the future will go too far in the future.
If I pass this, everyone who has passed since I passed, from here on out, will be the same.
I haven't been able to get to Bobon in a decade, as if I don't know who you are.
It's not just me, it's me, it's me.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm going to fight with an angel.
It can be used as an acronym or as a synonym for reconmixation.
For example, one person tops the coffee season and then paises an invitation to the party.
Di bon Mouche coffee pap bon mache anesa top many yen coffee Mouche
Soun moun ta konni Begand kat m ta kour
or bay li.
Deyè wè waway sa
They're just a bunch of guys.
Pa bèy bon mache café ye monchè
There is no such thing as an al ap pyès
Coffee is a great way to get to know you.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
There are many ways to meet men.
I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results.
The men were very close to each other.
I'm not going to tell you.
This is because they are willing to sell everything they have to pay for it, and they are willing to pay for it.
If a person doesn't buy something to buy from an Leviathan, he can do it.
And someone who doesn't buy it, instead of buying it, will sell it.
Let's have some wine.
I'm going to start with you.
How to start a business.
Who wants to buy from me?
There is even a large number of women who have sex with men.
I'm going to be a free man.
Yo yo te drevandèl, anna a, yo jen drevandèl.
It's the same thing with the tabs.
I'm not going to talk about it.
It's all in your head.
They won't be the same person they were born with.
In a shop, you'll find a toothpaste, a toothpaste, a toothpaste, and a toothpaste.
You'll be able to catch up with the person who wins the first 12 rounds and buy one at a convenience store.
It's a trade-off between the two.
Takou yon one member si l joun tout machan li t ap buy from men
You're a member of this group.
I bought them.
It's been a long time coming.
It's like being at home.
It's like because the water is as big as the water for you.
In addition, such as the monstot mangwa chemen an, a large amount of it is said to be able to enter the Yadonm.
You are Tras, you are Chemalakantay.
Desi m bezon ale m
I'll help you if you need me.
a member of the board of directors.
as a member of the board of directors.
It's not like I'm going to do anything wrong.
I've been to London for a while now.
Lonton m Si m bezwan Jiris and I can take against Jiris Machi
I can't wait to see what you bring.
If you're a dentist, you're a dentist in a car.
Ap arrives in front of the swal t
That's why I'm with you.
The other party is with a chwal to take too, so don't go to such a party, but go to your own party.
Than Akizas l al kishon mesiou li dow Sivel
There is no longer any salt.
I know what you're talking about.
I'm going to go out and take a shower.
I've seen three of the cautious people who know Brid, here, but who don't know Brid, Gonvòt, can't.
Nan Goud la
Konba ofou an amid bouch mò
I have met Goud La.
I'm trying to make a difference.
Before you put salt on your skin.
Or I'd say I'd rather have a look at it.
No one else was able to pass it on to him.
When you can choose, in your own way, to put on your head like this, or fwonkit bay too, or anmen your head.
When you get to the school, you'll be able to get to the school and fall behind you.
Or, if you put something so big on your head that you can get a little bit more, it's too late.
If you don't want to eat an animal, or if you don't want to eat a snack, or if you don't want to eat right now, you're going to have to change your parameters.
Whether it's to make or to plant something or to plant something, it's all that matters, it's all that matters.
They can be used for any type or purpose.
Or someone for someone who is going to be able to do it.
or as a sa
Methane or its derivatives.
metan or ba la.
How do you know if you're going to make it through, how do you know if you're going to make it through?
Well, do you want to use a swab, for that matter, for that matter?
Everything or anything else like the two of you or as a new record I'm in Patab an member of Yann an
Bayza yo, ki jan or rele yo, k viv.
It's all in the book.
The man then took out the money and brought it home with him.
One of the main reasons for this is men.
They are men.
They're in your court.
This is a Bond.
Do you tie a tie or, do you tie a tie or, do you tie a tie or, do you tie a tie or, do you tie a tie or, do you tie a tie or, do you tie a tie or, do you tie a tie or, do you tie a tie or, do you tie a tie or, do you tie a tie or, do you tie a tie or, do you tie a tie or, do you tie a tie or, do you tie a tie?
This is how a rejisfism of men is achieved.
It's not like I'm going to be able to keep my mouth shut.
I'm going to make them compatible.
They're out of sync with each other.
There are a lot of people out there who want to talk about it.
They don't belong here.
After all, the thing about the theater is a beautiful thing to do, the thing is to do, the thing is to do.
It's not like I don't have a brother or sister.
I've seen the difference between men and women.
Blanch is not a bad guy.
If one of the other two men were to take the sword, the other would have to take the sword.
It's all in the name.
Like li or kote tout like li or kote lak tout tè lal
This is why I'm here to help you.
It's all in your head.
The elephant fell to the ground, took the tea and hit it again, and so it was.
But if someone says, "I'm going to do something", what do I do?
However, if you don't want to enter the country, you can leave the country.
That's how I ended up targeting me, against pijon rele, balizay.
I mean, it's just a bunch of other things, isn't it?
You can't just put your life on the line and take it or leave it or leave it.
They're using Bit too.
It's a bit of a mess here.
Or win or lose or plant something like a man bit la
I can't wait to see what you're up to.
Take it or leave it.
One can mounk la yon thus, mounk l'ap mate, and so on as Badl la.
This is the only way to plant the potatoes.
I mean, I'm like, you know, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like, you're like,
And, Lord, I will not bante you from this world.
If you're in the right place at the right time, you're a human being.
I know it's going to be really good to do it so that you can play your part at home.
I'll be fine, I'll be fine, I'll be fine, I'll be fine, I'll be fine, I'll be fine, I'll be fine, I'll be fine, I'll be fine, I'll be fine, I'll be fine, I'll be fine, I'll be fine, I'll be fine, I'll be all right, you know what I mean.
There's just too much to eat right now, or to eat right now, or not to eat right now, to have a pransakte underneath you.
It's not just me, it's you.
It's true, Edira, you're a ton, you know, you're a ton, you're a ton, you're a ton, you're a ton, you're a ton, you're a ton, you're a ton, you're a ton, you're a ton, you're a ton, you're a ton, you're a ton, you're a ton, you're a ton, you're a ton, you're a ton, you're a ton, you're a ton.
Obele w pran te a
Or do something like that, or do something like that.
I don't know what I'm going to do.
You can't do anything or anything, you can't do anything, you can't do anything, you can't do anything, you can't do anything, you can't do anything, you can't do anything, you can't do anything, you can't do anything, you can't do anything, you can't do anything, you can't do anything, you can't do anything, you can't do anything, you can't do anything, you can't do anything, you can't do anything.
O, t ap ou manden sa la, ou t agon or field di li, the men sa rap fin now, li vay sa.
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to see it.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
They're not even on the phone.
I came here to talk to you about Jwif.
It's like a big gene.
There are two main reasons for this.
It's like I'm in the middle of something and it's like I'm in the middle of something.
It's about time we got back to Germany.
Enowel, barrel of enoel, take two will fresh pousse.
As a result of this, we are able to make a recording of the encyclopedia.
such as an jou bin
A pop-up is a pop-up.
The touz and the conveyor belt are all over the place.
on to know an
There is no such thing as a reyensey or a reyensey.
So much for you.
Or someone to lead.
Or put it all together with
Yo a dilèt yon lop.
Ok, if you may a.
Such as the law of the jungle.
It's like you can't get enough of it.
It's the best thing about coffee.
It's a coffee shop.
No, I'm going to tell you.
As I was doing so, Gon se li k k ap vole fell.
If you eat or drink your mother's milk, you'll be able to keep it in your pocket.
And if you're going to do that, you're not going to be able to pull it off.
Yeah, that may not be the case.
If you remember Kaboula a, sa ou, or reti ren l'ap, so ap reti ren, sa ap reti ak li yon ne l.
I'm going to make a cup of tea and I'm going to make two pizzas, and I'm going to show you.
It's a great way to get them together.
It's not like I'm going back to the drawing board or anything like that.
or to do something about it.
What's the point, again, where's the golden tree?
Why don't you have a date?
If I have a man who is my boss, I have a man who is my boss, just as a man has a man who is my boss.
Either I, Ecos, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I, or I
Kou la te bep men.
Go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go,
If you don't smoke or use tobacco, you're not going to be able to use it.
There are so many people who can't get enough of it.
It's not just a song, it's a song, it's a song, it's a song, it's a song, it's a song, it's a song, it's a song, it's a song, it's a song, it's a song, it's a song, it's a song, it's a song, it's a song, it's a song, it's a song, it's a song, it's a song, it's a song, it's a
They want to make their debut together.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
If we met and envyed san
Lokase mendi bagat oujou E if I fall on the foot of the tache w
I'm going to tell you about the radman and the pran.
Radman took a look at a person's tache.
Well, for the palm of your hand, there's nothing wrong with that.
Like I said before, I don't care.
I'm going to win.
I don't want to cut it off, but I want to cut it off.
I'm going to take a look at what I've done and I'm going to see if I can do anything.
If benzene is a mangon, I can say that it's a good thing, so you can eat it.
Toukoswèm Mache in the month, Yon series debay with the couwed Well-known with the couwreuvoir decorated with the feet or hands.
It's been a long time since I've seen you.
I'm behind you and I don't want to be around you like that.
It's like a bunch of flowers in my lifetime.
It's the only thing I can do.
Yo genius vangalè Wke li, like Zaboka.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that, but I'm sure I'm going to be able to do that.
I'm going to put a little sauce in the saucepan.
The location of the person was determined by the local authorities.
Here we are.
It's all in your head.
It is all about everything.
It can look like it's going to happen.
Or is it really good?
I've been waiting for you.
Li k ap eva from behind
Are they primarily concerned with how to make money?
Or graffiti, i'm a graffiti, or a cut, or a coupon in the party, then yo no metan man.
Li yon seyè deva biyay like oujoun yo nan anbò a
Ojoun yo woc kote ap ap now or not.
Pan, pasye or papeyal men anything to eat or long cook, jan relevay sa fouy.
It's what you're looking for, what you're looking for, what you're looking for, what you're looking for, what you're looking for, what you're looking for, what you're looking for, what you're looking for, what you're looking for, what you're looking for, what you're looking for, what you're looking for, what you're looking for, what you're looking for, what you're looking for, what you're looking for, what you're looking for, what you're
And I'm going to tell you who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am, who I am.
I'm going to do the same thing.
Can you tell me if it's something in the English language?
There are several non-cutting sheets.
There are several ways to do this.
Ap t la
It's all about falling.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything or anyone else to help me.
It's not just me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me.
He knows how to take care of himself.
It's been a long time coming.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
It's not like that or anything like that.
or Tibet so m Sa distribution
I've been running since then.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
Distribution and distribution is where I don't want to be.
At the same time, I've been able to get up, down, down, and down.
Go ahead and do a little bit of it.
They don't know what's going on, and they don't know what's going on.
When you plant a plant, you plant a tree.
I know what I can do to know what will happen to you in the long run and in the long run.
We can't wait to get there.
There are people who are just a little crazy.
For the first time in the history of the country.
Rivo is ahead of its time.
I don't know anything about it.
They're going to have to do something about it.
One of the reasons for this is that it's not easy to find a base.
vayad tayad anpanba bit la l ap pase
I fell as if I were just passing the bill on a branch of the U.S. government.
If you want to know what's going on in your life, take it easy and make fun of it.
It is a place like a big water or a place like a French water to put in the native canal of prole jen monze and li anrele.
In a big way, men are a tool for doing something like this, or two of a kind, man, if you want to imitate it, man, man, man.
Do something like this.
It's time to move on to the next step.
This is what happened to Zion.
Will Zion be able to come to Zion with a cup of tea?
Or is it all of them?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
Or is it the end of it, or is it the end of it all?
I've been through it.
I could fall into the other one.
I know what's going on in the middle of it.
I'm going to give it to you.
How did you come to plant the plant?
Men don't act as if they are anti-Semitic in the midst of an anti-Semitic movement.
As soon as you can put the plant in it.
The people, the men, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people,
The inflation point, before I fall into the other, holds me, allowing me to hold your base.
When it comes down to it, make a profit, or sell it back, or sell it back, or sell it back.
You will live on the water, like a waterfall in a man's water, so that you will be able to drink it.
I was born in Nazi Germany.
I'm with you.
I'm going to teach you.
Or take a break from my passions.
I can't wait to hear it.
He's always been a good fan of reponnye.
I'm not going to answer any of my questions.
I'm not tired.
Now, there's always the answer.
Thank you very much.
When people know how to fight and fight, they have to do something about it.
I'm fighting and I want to be a yo
I know what I'm going to do.
And after a different celebration, and after a while, too, I know.
Are you going to sell them?
Men, I'm also talking about, the same thing, the same thing.
Enel, if I had come to you, I would not have known what to do, what would I do, what would I do?
I've been smoking, smoking, smoking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, drinking, and other things in my life.
You're going to have to go back to Chigou.
Ap continue your soul from the beginning to the end.
or as in the case of di.
buy or sell.
Or lose it for a living.
What is the purpose of such a celebration or event, what is the purpose of such a celebration, what is the purpose of such a celebration, what is the purpose of such a celebration, what is the purpose of such a celebration?
I can't even make a bet.
Do you want to run or do you want to run?
Well, Elem will detonate you shortly.
Now I'm taking my dad's grades to the point where I can't do anything about it.
This is a new papal year in the ranks of the Roman Catholic Church.
I'm here to help you.
I'm here to help you, I'm here to help you.
If you want to play the game, there are 30 bagals of earth or tea, or a, a, a, a, or a.
I have all sorts of ladèb
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
There is no such thing as a man.
They cut off the genome and the genome from the genome.
You can play in a good team and in front of people.
It's not the same person.
Genn or la
Always with the same karaz kat the same li several
You've got your cat or they've got a base point.
It's about a tenth of the way through.
I'll be right behind you.
I'm going to buy a bay of zalif.
In other words, if there's a twepout, there's an anneve.
People like to play games with men who are as good as the ones in front of them.
I'm going to put them on or off.
I'm going to move forward with my life.
In the meantime, we're moving forward with the Lido.
As soon as I arrive, I can find the right place to go, Andamye.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
It's my twelfth birthday.
I'm going to drink your wine.
I'm sure you'll be able to keep up with what's going on in your life, and I'm sure you'll be able to keep up with what's going on in your life.
Or fashionable in one or two people's sleep.
And so another one is another job.
It's the only way I'm going to survive.
I know how fast I'm going to do it.
model other daf tivin
or know how to use it.
I don't want to talk about other people's feelings, I don't want to talk about words.
Gen be in front of a front sa k ap bat la a
Even when I'm singing a song.
I'm going to do the work I'm going to do.
There is a place to sing for people to sing for you.
If you want to sing it, sing it.
I'll offer you what I can do.
I can take the same take on the same theme yo bon
I know you're invited.
and enter it.
I'm going to tell you.
Sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me, sing to me.
And then I sing to people who know how to sing to you.
I'm not an adult yet.
If you want to know what's going on in your life, you need to know what's going on in your life.
I'm going to tell you something.
And then again, there are other men.
Lichans have been around for a few years now.
I love you and I love you and I love you and I love you and I love you and I love you and I love you and I love you and I love you and I love you and I love you and I love you and I love you and I love you and I love you and I love you and I love you and I love you and I love you and I love you and I love you and I love you.
There's no other way.
E das now tip das, you know now m?
I'm going to go!
And then there's the tea!
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm here for you.
No one knows how to dance well with a riff.
I can't wait to see what people think of it.
The house is now a private dwelling.
That's how I'm going to beat this guy.
ap rehanch ne.
I'm so sorry to hear about this, but I'm sorry to disappoint you.
And now, I know how to sing, or I know how to sing things like that when I'm a police officer.
There are a number of other museums and things that I know how to do, and I also know how to use them.
I'm going to kill you.
I'm going to win and I'm going to win.
I don't know who they are.
Takou lalati or souffle l la
You're the only one who can help you.
No one else is happy, you're borrowing your mind and mouth, but people are happy, they're happy.
Klai Won, make a man compete with a man, a great man.
If you want to be a tanbou, you can be a tanbou.
It's not a game, it's a game.
Well, I don't like it, and I don't play football, I don't play football, I don't play football, I don't play football, I don't play football.
When the balloon passes through Gounmou, there are two Gadyen.
Kapab's teeth are the same.
How much do you know or do you know?
He has repeatedly rapped and played a Balon an
When I was rapping, I was playing balloon outdoors.
Yo g ap santre l.
Too, they're fin sot outside.
I'm ready to touch.
Where is the wine, such as wine, where does it come from?
Or is it gen vitman?
Men are the same thing as man, and if they take man, they are not to be counted against the law or to be counted against the law.
It's not like you don't know what you're getting yourself into, nor do you know what you're getting yourself into.
Well, like you've seen, or washed your face, I'm ready for you.
It's the only thing I've ever seen.
If you're not a member, you'll want to know if you're a member, if you're a member, if you're a member.
Can't you afford to be a messiah?
Who is the last person in the world, so who is the last person in the world, who is the last person in the world, or who is the last person in the world to work?
E lanmounan manj like tou gad la like tout sa yo.
Eltat ap doing in front of the radchire to be able to speak, their language.
They're coming from the same place.
And one of the first people to realize that even on one of these occasions, there is such a thing as a rad.
Dechive so much that it is impossible for me to walk.
But there are other ways to get there.
I think I'm going to have a good time.
The people, the people Malkwòp sa eat, sa an gwen too.
Yes, I can do something like that for a new rad.
It's like I'm doing what I'm supposed to do.
I'm going to do it.
I'll tell you what I'm going to do.
Like I said before.
Give people the same things as donti rat thing
You're right in front of me.
We're not going to put them on the radar.
It's not even a good idea.
What's the big deal?
What's the big deal?
You have to work hard to get it done, so you can get it done.
It's such a beautiful piece of cloth.
Take a deep breath.
You can't buy a dog, you can't buy a drill, you can't buy a gabadin, you can't buy a leopard, you can't buy a leopard.
It's just a matter of time before it's blinks.
How do you buy it?
I'm going to buy the arabic, all setwells, science.
I want to buy a pill.
It's not just a piece of cloth, it's a piece of cloth.
They're going to have to come up with a great line of clothing.
You have souve yon skab modou
There's no such thing as a one-on-one contest.
How can I help you?
I'm going to tell you a secret.
What do you think of it?
I know, I don't know.
I know how to beat fatalon men, even when I hear that you're not fatalon.
Sin is a sin.
I've often worn trousers and felt like a new pair of trousers.
Or once the trousers or re-touse
How am I supposed to know?
Hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
Ok, four kounmishwetè a, Mba, swite ayetas, m, as mwen se swivit mometi lanm ap antalon, se li si belie.
If there is a blood clot, if there is a blood clot, is there anything I can say?
Le w poukèw an, or will chase the onmagya, or take to.
If you want to wear a pair of trousers, you can wear a pair of trousers.
It's a new way of looking at the world.
It's just a matter of law.
You know how much you can get out of school, and how much you can get out of school.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
I'm not going to be able to ride the wheel.
They've got a lot of them.
It's not just me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me.
I know how to get past you.
Men wound Ma yo reyant Baryali himself, they are both truejis.
Men know that they are all the same.
Or do you have a boyfriend or a girlfriend, a boyfriend or a girlfriend, a boyfriend or a girlfriend, a boyfriend or a girlfriend, a boyfriend or a girlfriend?
M pa disi, or an umbrella, or an infé meyab.
In a house like this, who are you, Sandal?
This is my soul.
And the tankouman soul is not there, it is not there.
This is how I feel, Bòd!
If you're going to be able to communicate with someone who's asking for you, you're going to be able to communicate with me.
It's kind of like knowing something or something.
It's like that because you're not coming from someone else's side of the world.
Kendefwa is born with a chou yon like on bezwon again than any other human being.
If you want to be a man, you can be a man, a man, a man, a man, a man, a man, a man.
Nou fonm boukantaj, liyen nou twoke.
Then I dropped the man's pallet.
It's going to take a long time.
I went to Mass in the Church.
I was able to make Andèv allay mete li ri ri ri i l d such Jipon
and others.
Now that we've got the JIP, and we've got the JIP, we've got the JIP, we've got the JIP, we've got the JIP, we've got the JIP, we've got the JIP, we've got the JIP, we've got the JIP, we've got the JIP, we've got the JIP, we've got the JIP, we've got the JIP, we've got the JIP, we've got the JIP, we've
In other words, it's a great way to get rid of the habitat in which you live, and it's a great way to get rid of it.
Under the sun, there is a person who knows how to use it.
Hey, can I marry you?
Mouchwa Mwik, ele zòkamit tout tèt ou bou lapli, rele yo anbrey, parap li.
Li janpebe sa suitcase.
If you don't want to do that, you're going to have to pay for it.
Or put you behind someone like that.
Or a recipe for myself.
Hey, I don't know who Sanj is, either.
What are you going to do with a bouchy?
Or if you're not aware of it.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it myself.
It's a lot more important than anything else in the world.
Ban wè san
I'm sure you'll be able to keep up with your grandmother.
It's like a grandmother.
There are many varieties of doui.
There is a good chance that you will get a lot of benefits from the couvalye mwazèl.
Men, I don't want to take long men and I'll give you a chance to find out who you're talking to.
I'm going to release it.
I know you've met me before.
It's not just a story.
If you're a man, you're not a man.
And yet, hey kepi, they are agilés men now, they are from the casket, they are from the same.
Everything is the same bagal.
I'm going to give you a tip on what to do.
It's not about women.
It's not like it's too hot.
Yes, just like a man with a finite head, a man with a finite head is a man with a finite head.
They eat themselves.
Or should I marry myself, or should I marry myself, or should I marry myself?
When I put it down, I take a couple of bottles, put them in a bottle, and use it in a bottle.
Or if there is something wrong with it.
As a matter of fact, there is no such thing as a foreign nation.
I'm going to have to do something about it.
If you're not as good as someone else, you can't say the same thing.
We don't even know who he is.
It's not even about you.
Because it's just like no one else.
Or the same Eritrea, or the same family.
We're not the only ones who know what's going on.
Tankou is like the man who used to call the Telijan and pi gondot baderer like the Andre Pyè.
Don't worry about it.
It's a must-have if you want it.
The person who appears on the scene needs to know when they're ready to go.
It's the same with women and men.
What is the meaning of the word, what is the meaning of the word, what is the meaning of the word?
It's what people do.
I've been working on a new one.
Ma'am, if we don't even know what to do about it, marin.
I don't know if I'm going to get a loan.
It doesn't even have a name.
I'm a mother and a grandmother.
Papa Poppo, or sa a divi, granp ap ap?
On man, dad or?
Noun Papò a lè, great toutonm!
My grandfather told me that I was going to die.
I said something to this man.
Passye yo pa know
You know what I'm going to do for you.
I'm going to go out there and get to know my family.
There are other things you can do before you're a man, even an old man.
I'm going to take it with me.
One of my friends and I prayed for something new.
A new prayer for the grandson of Seth.
If you're a kid, or someone you know, you're not going to have anything to do with me, my child.
But I can't stand it any more, man.
One of the men is a man.
That's because I'm a garbage collector.
or the genesis of the child.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
It's up to us who we are.
Or, fredo Eras, I'm still going on here, why?
And if I were to say, no one would open up like this, no one would, if I didn't know where I was from, I would say no.
Do you see something about yourself or about something that you like to call someone after taking chak Lijan?
They take no notice of the contrary.
If you want to go, if you want to go, I'll give you a piece of luggage.
How many times do you call someone like you on Majadon la?
The price is right.
I'm going to take a look at it first.
Well, hey, a few examples, like I'm a nephew of a man who's been there, they've been there, and I've seen a man who's been there.
Men come from all walks of life, but they don't come from all over the world.
There are people who can't get enough of you.
To make a man known as a ruler is to make him a king.
I'm a ton and a ton short.
and others.
There are others like you who are just like me.
It's the only thing behind it.
It's like a vowel.
I have a job.
The cost of living and the cost of living is a lot higher than the cost of living and the cost of living.
or annig mach yo well li li da
We're going to have to do it all again.
Or in any other way I can do it.
The new people will come to you as soon as possible.
People can spend the rest of their days at the same place.
The other day I knew I could do it.
I'm going to kill L.
It can be taken on a ban.
The phone rings the doorbell because it's your birthday.
I'm going to tell you a story.
Yo diswa w moun ton non
I'll put you in my shoes if you're a criminal.
I don't want to see the beast again.
I don't want to hear it again.
Let's see if we can make it work.
It's been so long since I've been able to talk to you.
If I don't want to leave, I'm going to leave.
I was looking at your coupab.
I'm going to try to make it to the next level.
koupab sa a
Take them as I listen to them.
If the people want to, a prison enfri salkadi, a depot, then the people want to be a prison anvil, wi.
Kouto, who are your other members?
Sab, who are your other members again?
Kijan releases the new country an m
It's also so important to know how Klòd la
Such as Boman an Kay or gelay sa l
or ap pale yon person of Jiremi
I'd like to add a list of everything else.
I'm going to tell you about it.
If I did something to you, how would you do it?
Do I feel like I'm going back to my account?
If I send you or someone else, do they know where you are coming from?
Whether or not they know who I am, we know who they are.
Whether it's in the countag or at sea, and all that's going on around you, I'm sure you'll find.
Jon releases all the blocks of tea to you.
Why can't I go to the other side of the bay?
Whether I get up or not, I don't eat or drink.
I'm also a fan of Monte Carlo.
They're just like a mother.
It's not like I'm born with kids.
There's not another one.
I don't know what to do with myself.
It is as if it were true.
I'm sure you'll be able to get your hands on it.
I'm going to have to go to the mountains.
Straight and straight.
It's a good idea to use it.
I'm with you both.
I'm going to have to pack another bag and I'm going to have another one.
I feel like I'm on the same page as everyone else.
Or will be in the head of the person.
or by finmrivi
It's in the same area as the rest of the country.
from his sins.
I'm not a fan.
He or she will be the immediate member.
It's either too late or it's too late.
Doye is undergoing wear and tear.
You know, it's so bad, it's so bad, it's so bad, it's so bad, it's so bad, it's so bad, it's so bad, and it's so bad.
I want to re-create everything that I can and I want to work on it.
I'm ready to release it.
There will be another one again.
It's only rap.
I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know.
Well, when a car is mostly like a man's car, it's like a road trip.
If the car crashes, where I fall, I'm going to fall.
For a long time, Satan's power has been undermined, and wherever I live, I will live forever.
On se li de kote or k ap antre ann dami
Now you have two things to do, do your own thing.
There are angels like you.
It's hard to believe that you're not going to be able to keep up with the pace of things.
The length of the river is as high as 60 meters.
If you have the right to run for office, you are free to do so.
If you are a beast, you can run.
I'm looking forward to the full moon.
This is your home.
Get up there and run for it.
It's a lot of fun and it's a lot of fun.
It all comes down to good times.
I told you everything.
It's going to be tough.
and a bay is a consak
How do you know you're here?
It's your fault, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right,
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
It's also a great place to hang out with friends and family.
I've been here a long time.
It's so much easier now or something else.
I've got a lot of problems with my condition.
It's the only thing I can do.
I fell for the river.
I feel like I'm a right-wing person and I can't look anywhere.
If you don't write it again, m, m, abodation will not write it again, and if you don't, you can't.
It's not as bad as it sounds.
It's not like you're going to be able to do it.
We have two people who don't know.
Do you know how many people have been killed?
It's not going to be the same.
I'm not even sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
An toukalè w chonje tou ap tivan
You'll get a chance to see what it's all about.
water or know what to do with it.
I'm going to tell you a story.
It's like a water bottle under the teaspoon.
Like water as a right to do, like water as a right to do, like water as a right to do, like water as a right to do, like water as a right to do, like water as a right to do, like water as a right to do, like water as a right to do, like water as a right to do, like water as a right to do, like water as a right to do, like water as a right to do, like water as a right to do, like water as a right to do.
So you're headed to minisye or ti konsan
Like water as a right to do like jitèt ban kou an Obe soudou
Many of the men who were there fell down in front of him.
There are two types of miracles that occur in such a way.
Douch sou an. douch sou an.
Is there a place like this, or is there a place like this, or is there a place like this, or is there a place like this, or is there a place like this, or is there a place like this, or is there a place like this, or is there a place like this, or is there a place like this, or is there a place like this, or is there a place like this, or is there a place like this, or is there a place like this, or is there a place like this?
Alò, l'le pa, as if I hadn't, tout deux?
Men like Rivye know where to look.
Li pa fouye rivye a même ki fouye l ou mon album
And you're on the phone more than anywhere else.
It's a great way to get through the middle of the night.
He fell down and fell to his knees.
Men, when the rain falls again, there is one thing I can't stand.
There are also other types of tension.
They're going down now.
I know what I'm going to do when I get there, but I don't know what I'm going to do when I get there.
I'm looking forward to seeing you again.
There is no command to do anything.
I'm looking forward to the next one.
I can't get enough of your passion.
I can't wait to see what's new.
There is no place for a great Zion.
It's like being in the middle of the ocean.
People have lived in the same seasons.
There are only two things.
Because I don't want to put a ban on anything.
There are a lot of things I know.
Everybody knows that everything can be done as soon as possible, as soon as possible, as soon as possible, as soon as possible, as soon as possible, as soon as possible, as soon as possible, as soon as possible.
I don't want to be here anymore.
There is no water to drink and no wine to drink.
The wine is completely dry.
I'm going to vote for him.
I'm in the middle of it.
I'm sure you'll be able to get through it.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Or you can order it as if it is because you are the only monk in the monastery.
It's because I've been sleeping for so long.
I'm not sure if this is a good idea.
I'm here to give you an order.
Ba jwit anen radanm, who t ap woun di?
Wap Gade on the water Wap Gade on the water, on the water, on the water, on the water, on the water, Kelen!
Can't tears of men like you cry?
The advice of the slippery slope.
If you're glistening, if you're vegetarian, if you're a lemon, if you're a vegetarian, if you're a vegetarian, if you're a vegetarian, if you're a vegetarian, if you're a vegetarian, if you're a vegetarian, if you're a vegetarian, if you're a vegetarian, if you're a vegetarian, if you're a vegetarian, if you're a vegetarian or if you're a vegetarian or if you're a vegetarian
E gra, m, e gra, e gra are the grains.
But I'm not sure what to do about it.
River from a.
Either that or two rad series or so.
I'm going to tell you how much I'm going to eat.
Then the smallest member is two, the right one is the wheel, the left one is the same, the right one is the same, the right one is the same, the right one is the same, the right one is the same, the right one is the same, the right one is the same, the right one is the same, the right one is the same, the right one is the same, the right one is the same, the right one is the same, the right one is the same, the right one is the same, the right one is the right one, the right one is the
I'm sure you've heard of them.
That's how I'm going to make a sound like I'm going to make a sound like I'm going to make a sound like I'm going to make a sound like I'm going to make a sound like I'm going to make a sound like I'm going to make a sound like I'm going to make a sound like I'm going to make a sound like I'm going to make a sound like I'm going to make a sound like I'm going to make a sound like I'm going to make a sound like I'm going to
Such as a couwè sa a la a
I'm going to tell you about L...
La pitiyan an t ap, such as sa, adegwo sè yo, gwo wanch, pijan tou gwo wanch.
I know that if you want to go ahead, you have to go ahead.
Or maybe you're just trying to get a feel for what you're doing.
I know if I'm going to stand up for a concert or two.
I don't want to do that.
I know the same trastras, trastras, or two se or stand l kabid avò, ap devoule, toujan t devoulay.
The price of a person's life is too high.
Well, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
If so, how do you know that you are not my spy?
It's like I'm dying.
Like when I was a kid.
Or I'm going up straight as if I'm doing this.
It's not like I'm going to make a fool of myself by doing something like this.
I used to live with people who lived in such a villainy.
You don't know if you're going to make it or not.
They're so good to me and they're so good to me.
You're going to be a gooch.
The soul and soul of Okap is m
The people of Okap are the same as the people of Okap.
I can't wait to see you again as a teenager.
I know how to talk to people Okap
I know who Okase is.
And then there's a lot of people who don't like it.
When you're ready to hear, open your mouth, open your mouth, open your mouth, and open your mouth.
When a man stands up, the man stands up and the woman stands up and the man stands up.
If there is a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person, a person,
If you don't want to be disconnected
Am I going to eat my dog again?
I'm not going to lie.
Are you ready to go?
People, I don't want to talk about it, I want to talk about it.
I want to be able to talk to someone who wants to talk to me.
The people on the ground are not pressing ahead.
I'm going to pass.
I can't think of anything else to do with it.
I'm not going to tell you what to do about it.
I don't need to.
When you're on a machine, you're on a machine, you're on a machine, you're on a machine, you're on a machine, you're on a machine, you're on a machine, you're on a machine, you're on a machine, you're on a machine, you're on a machine, you're on a machine, you're on a machine, you're on a machine, you're on a machine, you're on a machine, you're on a machine, you're on a machine
I don't know how many people have done this to me.
I don't think I can go through with it.
A machine that passes through the world.
I'm going to the car.
It's like a machine nap wine.
I've had a lot of time and I'm happy to be here.
There's never been anything like it.
And if someone doesn't want to be on the road, they're not going to be on the road.
There is no doubt that this is true.
They won't be able to use the bathroom to do this.
When I'm going to be in Jerim, I'm going to be in Jerim.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
I want to talk to you right now.
I am very much in love with Jerim.
Can I get a phone call?
I've got wine, can I do that?
I'm sorry, but I can't find my way back.
And the people of Zion will be so righteous, they will never cease to be righteous!
It's not that simple.
They're going to be sitting on the sidelines.
They have good value.
They're worth the price of admission.
The police officers are at home.
I'm going to do it.
If you don't want to go
I'm not sure what to do.
I'm going to do something about it after I'm done with it.
I'm a slave to this recipe.
The people who need it are the ones who need it.
I don't know if I can tell you the difference between the two.
Do you know where the lesson is coming from?
You know if it's one or two people, if it's one or two people, if it's one or two people, if it's one or two people, if it's one or two people, if it's one or two people, if it's one or two people, if it's one or two people, if it's one or two people, if it's one or two people, if it's one or two people, if it's one or two people, if it's one or two people, if it's one or two
Do you know where to go from here?
I'm going to get out of here.
Or you're going to have to do something about it.
They've just been there.
You've just got a new idea for them.
E si vay Janp
For some people, it's not like they're the same person.
One of them paid for it.
I'm going my own way.
I'm going to ask you.
One mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate, one mate,
I can tell you all about it.
Just like the man in the room.
Or if you're going to tell me something, you're going to tell me something.
I'm going to tell you two things.
Koubavè di Bonè is also known for his great-grandmother.
If you don't know who they are, will they be able to find their grandmother?
M, often with the head of the gounou and a tab of li, li, lit, lta, other wagons.
Esko gade ligouye voun nou, louye.
Man, I'm going to go up like a bucket of coffee for a whole bunch of days.
Before I die, I drink coffee and drink milk, as I shall rise as the sun goes down.
Sa gen order jen wop woman diset, li take coffee, li van fin gwo mwen mit not e, li van konn li ee, labren l.
Prom t disab
Take the prom and say the prom.
A prom prom prom t disab le
Mout the other side of a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
There is no substitute for new wine.
That's what I'm doing.
Men do not have the right to choose between them.
and one sanfret
Safrè is the name of the fridge.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
The men I eat lie down in the majors in the prom.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do this.
Alan d'jan vandiza, you are my mother.
Re-conditioning is the process by which all of the tones that were given to you can be recycled.
It's time for you to go to bed.
What's wrong with you?
Yeah, I know.
Okay, so I'm going to see all these people in the garden, and I'm going to tell you something, Granny.
I'd like to know more about it.
I know I'm going to be in a bad mood.
A short time later, the water passed through the area.
How much water is there to drink?
Or maybe I'm just going to have to pay a ton of attention to what's going on.
It's the only thing I can do.
I'm going to tell you the truth.
It's the first time I've seen it.
It's the only thing I've ever seen.
Sa kounm lobo jan man di, li reef man di, tanmari, salt la, mari, lou.
If you don't want to spend money on the sun fund in Fiji, you need to spend money on the sun fund.
You, like a frostbite in the sun, know that you're going to rain in the sun.
When you hear, whoever hears, whoever hears, whoever hears, whoever hears, whoever hears, whoever hears, whoever hears, whoever hears, whoever hears, whoever hears, whoever hears, whoever hears, whoever hears, whoever hears, whoever hears, whoever hears, whoever hears, whoever hears.
And yet, I have nothing left to hide, I have nothing left to hide, I have nothing left to hide, I have nothing left to hide, I have nothing left to hide.
It's a great way to get a feel for yourself and your family.
I live or I know or I know or I know or I can live or I can live.
For example, if you're wearing a mask, you're wearing a mask, or you're wearing a mask, or you're wearing a mask.
Or, you know, I can't open it.
Do you want to be so poor or do you want to be so poor or do you want to be so poor?
How did I get so caught up in it?
When the sun goes down and you can't live without it, you can't sleep without it.
You're the only one who can do it.
I don't know how to listen to you.
That's what Wim said.
I've heard that you've forgotten.
I've always wanted to be able to dance in a variety of genres.
They're all in the same boat.
It's not like there's a big cell, it's like there's a big cell.
When you hear the news, the light shines.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Are they still at sea?
Are they still there?
It's not like I'm going to die.
I can't wait to get to know them.
I'll give you a taste of fresh wine.
There's a lot of content on all of them.
There are a lot of things I know that I know that I know how to control the way I look at myself.
Four times in a row, people.
If you leave Andre or the others behind, you're not going to be able to do it again.
I'm not a fan of it.
Gouki and Kimalis and Kimalis.
It comes from the town of Touvman and Yo.
That's why I'm here.
Sezi Bèt men years to enter the Bèt interior.
and onbou chak sa
It's the only thing you can do.
Since then we've been doing Tonyvyat.
Mezi Bèt la t nonk Gouki
Malisa is not a Gouki.
Go on a vacation with your friends.
Vyann and yo
Dandène pou yo or in big beef
nonk Gouki ak sa ak li
This is Malisa t sa ak.
I'm not cutting off my hair.
I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I cut it off and I
I cut it off.
I'm not cutting off even Malizi.
Cut no more than the same place, but I'm not cutting well.
I'm not going to lie.
I've got the beef.
A change of beef is needed.
I can't wait to get there.
Itabè bef li kouche
Ben yo vini yo fin bay bef la avan yo antre baton
The father of the beef la
There is a lot of uncertainty surrounding the children's decade.
I'm going to take a pill for the beef.
Until you beat this asshole to death, you're going to have to live with it.
It's a lot of fun and a ton of fun.
There is a lot to do with the ball.
I'm going to open the door for you when you're ready.
Finn or enkòche bèf
I'm going to open the beef.
You've got something new going on.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you.
I'm going to try to get a new one.
Even after retreating from the bladder, the pee is removed.
I've just been cutting off the bladder and I've been rejected.
I'm doing a lot of stuff with bouki.
Malisyon's passion is that of the potato.
They're on their way to my future.
The roads and roads are clear.
They live their entire lives in the lake.
I've been to the lake for a while.
During the mission, I will keep the mission.
While I'm at it, I'm holding my breath.
I'm going to miss you.
It was also certified platinum.
During the course of the mission, you'll be able to pick up the bottle.
But it's not the other way around, it's the other way around.
It's like a father to a son.
A good amount of money can be made available to the general public.
He said, "I'm going to kill you".
Now I know how I'm going to do it.
Now you have a ton of bouki
They don't really exist anymore.
Bouki di o Malis di wi
They are men.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
Lalet, they leave Bouki, they leave Malis to them, they leave, Malis to them.
I've come to terms with the fact that I know what's going on.
Li up foot tabrikou ant a
Look at the back of the book so I can see the back of the book.
Malis veye bouki
I'm looking forward to it.
I don't want people to die.
I said I was going to die.
It's the end of the world.
There they are again
There are many other ways to do this.
I'm going to kill a member of my family for killing my grandfather or even my mom.
I'm not sure what to do with the bouk malis dakò
Kantis malis dakò is also known as kantis dakò.
Malis vinri or malis bouk with wine is also available.
The soldiers killed my mother.
They are now and bouk li Malis even take mom when i win the apesis if they are not touk moutonke palmis
Li sereman l.
Kant was a German.
Chak jou bouk ki ever and Malis
This is the first time I've been able to tell you about Malis's mother.
They've never been there before.
I put the wine in it.
Men, when the good Manman Malis arrived, they went back to work again.
The money is now available to my mother if she wants to pay for it.
It's not even my mother's fault that I'm in love with her.
In the end, they voted for them, they voted for them, they voted for them, they voted for them, they voted for them, they voted for them, they voted for them, they voted for them, they voted for them, they voted for them, they voted for them, they voted for them, they voted for them, they voted for them, they voted for them, they voted for them, they voted for them, they voted for them, they voted for them, they voted for them.
I'm going to do everything I can to change things.
It's not going to change.
They don't have to go through the whole thing.
I'm going to go through this until I'm done.
It's going to change.
I don't even know what I'm talking about.
It's not my mother's fault.
It's all right with the bouti.
There will be millions of others again.
Bouki retounne k ap gangangon
I'm not going to go through this again.
It's not a book.
I can't find the right way now.
Bouki arrives yo get or nice to or sood
It's now or never.
Li al karyon ranked first.
I'm going to tell you a few things that are going to happen.
The wine is taken from the mother tongue.
Menis are not the only ones.
I'm not sure if they'll be able to do that.
The wine is not made from grapes.
They're my mother.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to read the code.
Mom and dad are starting to get along with each other.
The beginning of the filing of the e-mails will be the beginning of the end of the year.
My mother and I are not friends.
It's not a big deal if you cut off my pocket.
They're not going to be able to keep up with what they're doing.
Cut off the coast.
Bouki fell on his penny.
Men who have been disqualified can also be disqualified.
Let them take the Malis
They took the Malis
Li Malis kouche.
They get Malis or kote.
You can find Malis or kote
They need me too much to do anything I want to do.
I'm going to take them to Malis.
Li Li is married to Lonsak.
I've been here for too long.
I can't take my clothes off.
li marin lonsak
They know they can take the money and throw it away for a long time, and they can take it back to the packaging.
Malis has a strong desire to make a living.
Malis plen sa k la wòch
En vi bouki ale
They're going to take it easy.
I know how hard it is to throw and throw.
Lan letan dou
It's not the same as the book l..
If you don't know what you're getting into, you'll also know what you're getting into.
They know they are evil.
They know they're evil.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
The men are your friends.
It's a shame that people don't want to eat beef.
Bef kabrit cheval al bayit water vou
Al bayit water vou people.
I can take you to the bay of water for your animals.
But I'm not sure if I'll be able to keep up with it.
Bouki di rete sevan or even sa m den lan gri lantou an
I want to know if you're going to be able to get the most out of your life.
They don't know where to put me, they don't know where to put me, they don't know where to put me, they don't know where to put me, they don't know where to put me, they don't know where to put me, they don't know where to put me.
Empi bouki di enmen lage m bon
I'm renting and launching my own picnic.
I'm going to take a book.
bouki antye and sak l
Take the book and leave it alone.
I'm going to be dead by the end of the day.
Don't be fooled by Malis.
Men are great counts.
I know how to fight.
Men can live in the battlefield.
I'm going to turn it around.
They're going to get Malis or kote.
Jodi and I will reside in Greco-Roman Greece.
In Mali's Oh
I've never been able to adjust with Wouki's tone.
I'm going to tell you the rules.
The wine is taken from the Malis.
They may not be able to lift their weight, but when they take their weight, they are able to return to their weight.
I'm going to rent a house and then I'm going to rent a house.
They will come down with fish, but they will be thrown into the depths of the sea.
When you throw the salt at the bottom of the sea,
Malis rive okou de la ou
It's hard to believe it's coming.
It prevents them from happening.
There are many books written by many people.
I'm going to school to get some potatoes.
Even in Mali, wine is derived from the sac.
I came from a very wealthy family.
It's full of life.
Bouki has come to us.
They're going to take a look at what's going on in there.
I'm very proud of you.
I'm at the bottom of the sea and I'm at the bottom of the sea.
After three days, they were sent to the bottom of the sea.
In the meantime, I'm going to have to go back to my mother's house.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
I'm going to try to get my hands on this one.
The new form of the dare is mainly l..
Festen ap feast like this
Men get Malis with only a handful of their money.
They say Oh
Where did you get all your money?
You're going to take up Jeten koto here.
t or al Jeten
I don't know if you'll ever be able to tell me.
But now the money is back in the bank, and Malis is still here.
They are native to the Maldives, where they can be found in the depths of the sea.
It's time for them to get their hands on the dough.
This is a ton of bouki.
Malis yo kote w
Malise did not want to spend the money.
I don't have any money for that.
The men had a great deal to do with Ali.
No one will ever be able to work for a living.
I don't want anyone to do the work.
Sitzens traval la gen fomi
But they're good enough to make it to the top five.
This is the first time that we've seen the genesis of fomi.
The river Malis al L'Héritage is located nearby.
There are two travals.
They're not going to be able to keep up with the demands of the miners.
It's going to be tough.
They say I'm going on a trip.
Now that they've done the work, I'm going to try to figure out how to fix it, and they're going to wake up.
I found them with a booklet.
I don't know if I can get a job or a job.
The men or women who pass through the pillows of the table.
I love to work and get a job that I can't afford.
It's okay with my kids, there's no problem.
It's not going to work.
I'm going to work.
Yo rive al kay wa
What if Malis didn't know how to travel?
They were from Mali or the mountains where they had been trapped.
They're not going to be able to keep up with me.
They are taken from the L.
I have fallen to despit.
It's not the end of the book, it's the end of the book.
Bouki even played a big game.
The story of Bouki is set in Fòmi k'an pal la.
Fòmi's job is to work for Fòmi's employer.
For a moment, Timon was standing in the midst of his fans.
Bouki even came and asked the child.
Men's clothing at home and abroad.
I've been waiting for you to come up with something.
You've got something I can cook for now.
Where am I coming from?
The child says a, man, I can, if I am not a member, I can, I can, I can, I can, I can't, I can't, I can't, I can't, I can't, I can't, I can't, I can't, I can't, I can't, I can't, I can't, I can't, I can't, I can't, I can't, I can't, I can't, I can't, I can
Men know how to train men to take everything off their backs.
I'm not going to ask you anything.
The book is written by the son of a man.
I'm also a member of one of the pools.
I'm banishing myself now.
How can I ban you now?
I've been banned for a long time.
I'm not going to tell you what I'm going to do.
It's time for me to make a decision about what I'm going to do with my life.
I'm going to tell you what to do every moment.
Let me ask you a question.
They come and ask the child what his mother knows about him.
The children are the mothers of the men.
It's the only way I'm going to get there.
They're the only ones who can't stop me.
I'm going to ban it.
Just like my mother, I've been banned.
It's not even the same thing.
I'm going to make it up to you.
I'm sure you'll be able to use it.
I've come to the conclusion that I don't want to work in the palace.
They're still working hard to get the job done.
We're going to finish the wine together.
You'll end up with al kay wa lè
I've been working hard to make you feel better.
I'll do it for three days.
You've got to be able to do that.
and touch.
It's all about consistency.
I'm here to help you find a place to stay.
You may not even be prepared to take the boat.
Because if you deprin set nou chak gen yon tout pran ladan.
Li said OK, and he's gone.
It's going to happen or it's going to happen.
Malis knows where you are.
I love a guy who's big.
It's a good idea to take a look at the recipe before you leave.
I'm going to take you bigger than you are.
You can't play with me.
Let them come.
This is what I'm looking for.
It's a great code for men.
This is the big code.
Li metan w and kabrit in the code of the law.
Bef la la
They've just come to me, but I'm not ready for them.
It's not as easy as it seems to be.
It will appear later in the day.
Se or stand men
It's not just me.
The book itself is very much like a book.
That's how I'm going to put it all together.
They're going to tell you.
The answer to that question is that I'm not sure how I'm going to do it.
Bouki bouki or you're the biggest pop star in the world.
I'm ready for them.
I've been waiting for you.
I'm looking forward to seeing what you've got going on here.
There's nothing wrong with Malis di a m ap jennou rat
It's not the first time Malis has taken the code, it's the last time he's written it.
I'm going to give you the code la lou.
It's a great way to get the most out of your life, even if it's too late.
I'm looking forward to seeing you even on a road trip.
I'm also a cabrit.
They took the grenness of it.
I'm going to visit Malis.
I've never seen or heard anything like that before.
The men of grenn kabout sa li fin santi
They don't say a word.
Ton boukin bon does not like me.
Manyen l ale
of men if I want to go back to my old age.
Li di Malis and the potatoes that came out of the mouth of the river Manyen.
I'm going to tell you a story.
Ton bouki m bag m pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou pou
I went back to Malis afterwards.
Li di Malis is a potato that has gone out of its way to pay for Manyen.
It's like a ton of books.
The men are going to go out of their way to make sure that you don't have to go out of your way.
I have a ton of bouki pran lalabye.
Pran men ti gen kabrut la
They've got a lot to do with it.
Now that I've got the cabbage, when they come in, they're like, 'Men, where's the cabbage?'
He said, "Because I'm thankful for the bread, I'm going to eat it now".
They said, "Brothers and sisters, who are now brutally murdered, murdered, or even murdered, are separated from us".
And then there's the fact that I don't want to go back to the drawing board.
They were separated when Mali Bouki had a dispute with the grand dispute.
I'm sure you'll be able to find it.
Revikaj chief and ap jijen
When Bouki appears, he becomes the chief.
They are located in Liparet.
I've been working with Malis since I started working with him.
I'm going to code.
The men on the big screen appeared to be taking a look at the anti-kabri ki vin an or M
Malis took the code and it was on the big boat Men even on the bottom of the tank now I'm going to be beef Malis la
I'm going to take a look at the men's shoes.
Kill the outcasts.
I'm going to the Bay of Malis.
Malis even now can or Malis can only be men who are best friends with them.
But they said they'd never eat it again.
Or now the laren mali di li
Then they said that they were going to ban the men in advance of Bonba Bou ki di Bonba or the Wap.
Now I'm just waiting for you to come along with me.
I'm just trying to figure out if it's going to work or if it's going to work.
It's also good for the bay malis
It's also a great way to get started.
You're just going to have to go through it.
Malis arrived at the scene to take the beef.
They're going to leave me alone.
I'm going to eat the beef.
Bouki men alè demalis triye bèf la
I'm not the only one who's got three cattle left.
Li vin fin koche bœf mete tipwo atè
They found the beef.
It's just a matter of getting the grenn in there.
Li said: Konn ya, Malis, what are you doing?
What I'm trying to do is make me feel better.
I'm not sure how to stop it.
Malis or they say E ben
I don't know who I'm going to be with tomorrow.
It's called Monche.
If you don't know what I'm talking about, don't worry about it.
I took them.
It's my way of thinking.
Li bay malis is a press combo.
Malis is good at it.
Manvi is now at the top of the ladder.
I'm going to try to make it to the top of the ton.
They're going to be there tomorrow morning.
It's the end of Eve's life.
They are separated from each other, and they have a good relationship with each other.
Malis or li fan tèt la
They're going to have a lot of fun with it.
This book is a collection of short stories that have been translated into several languages.
I'm not going to be able to do this for the rest of my life.
It is a bay bouki of Malismosolayan
Malis is the perfect match.
They took the heads of Malis even to the vineyards.
Li veye kot bouki put the head of the beef la
They're going to kill the beef.
Let's go before the beef.
They get sisters.
You can wear a head covering when you're wearing a head covering.
I'm going to be there for you.
They were greatly impressed with the wa.
They will come to you to reach the ends of the earth, and will give you the riches of the world.
I'm on your side.
Earth's genome is in the hands of men.
Malis is even more generous than the previous generation.
Li kouvrit or a byen pladi
A wine can be made from tea.
Or a wine appears.
It's a great book.
I know how to live on the earth.
Bouki even fell a few seconds into the fire.
It's not like I'm going to be able to read a book or anything like that.
They've got a lot to do with what they're doing.
They are also known as sinse pan lan.
and a sen a
There is a reason why I have to go back to the drawing board.
They're just a bunch of pancakes.
They're just trying to figure out why I'm here.
There are several ways in which you can do this.
I'm here to stay.
I'm going to get my hands on the book.
It's not like I'm going to be able to get up on the ground floor.
I'm going to take the next step.
I've been thinking about myself for a long time.
Li ni son si sen pan lan
It's a time for men.
Li pase manche at li
They take their heads off the book.
But if you have one leg, one leg, one leg, I'd rather not have one.
Then I went to Mali.
Mache Malis finds him and his wife in Zaboka.
I found out that Zaboka came from Bouki Men as a tranche for me.
This is a list of menus for the car.
He asked me to do a kat tranch.
There's a little bit more to it than that.
There's a little bit more to it than that.
There's a bit more to it than meets the eye.
It is possible to cut into a single tranch and cut into a single tranch.
They are then translated into a single tranch into a network of men.
They came from the tranch to the net.
They say that God's Son is not the enemy of their will.
It is now Zabouka totte te ba bay bouti, Malis, Abirèl, Wap bay douyou, toute nanm Frido, bay yon sanse.
Serve the bay, or the Malis.
Se Malis and Bouki and Kemenaj are the same as Men.
Gon grangon bal k ap feast
You will be invited to the ball.
Bouki anvyal and bal
Malis le vin li is one of the most important wines in the world.
MEN Daval is a member of the animal or up cones, animals or other animals.
We've got a lot of people coming up to us.
I've been waiting for you to come to my house.
It can be used to make salt and pepper.
Malis yo vin dakò was born.
Since then, I've been thinking about it.
Sunday mornings I'm up and running.
Tanchi yo rive y al nan ball since bouki made sa
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it all right, but I'm sure I'm going to be able to do it all right.
It's a great way to make sure you're well-rounded.
They're going up the booki
Men, when I come, when I come to Bòbari old age, bouki te dil wa esanmi, lè pike bouki and kout dipon.
Pass them behind than the people you know, li mare bouki lanm pa, listen yo throw to tra pomanje.
I'm going to go to Bouki's.
Malis's father lavated the men.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it myself, but I'm going to be able to do it myself.
The words of Bouki are Malis when it comes to sending Malis for Bouki
The book is so close to my heart.
It's not for the faint of heart.
I don't know how to get rid of fat.
Take them to the beach.
I'm looking forward to it.
I've seen a lot of books that I haven't read yet.
It's a cell phone that I've been using for a long time.
Come on, if you like, if you like Bouki and Mades.
This book is about a young woman and a young man.
Bouki has come up with a new love story.
You're the only one.
There is a new love in the land of women and men.
I'm not a woman's country but a man's.
It's the only thing I've ever been in love with.
And they said, "Oh!
I'm here to help men and women find love.
I'm not sure how much I'm going to pay for it.
They're not going to be able to keep up with what's going on.
They're not OK!
Malis an an an pri ale
Men or women know Malis better than Mouki.
I'm going to tell you that I'm not in love with you.
I don't like it when Malis arrives.
Mali is OK
I don't know much about the details.
Why don't you invite Bouki to the dance?
He told me that if I don't drink any more wine, I'm not going to drink any more wine.
As long as it's OK.
I'm going to get to Malis in time for Oh.
All in the land of the women of San Gason
He replied, "No, I'm not".
I'm sure you'll find it hard to believe my mother's death.
Since then, I've been living in the Maldives.
In the meantime, I'm going to take care of myself.
It's bad for your head.
It's not a bad thing to do.
It's hard to believe that you're not the only one who's done this.
The men will be punished.
Bouki wine passes two wines to Malis for I wine to Malis for the ball.
Malis di ton Bouki p p ap pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa
I don't think I'm going to be able to listen to him.
Bouki is a man of many talents.
Malis and m p ap can be traced back to him.
Bouki was on the phone or came to Mali from Bondon Bouki when I felt like I could walk for a long time.
There is only one thing I can do for you.
If only I could force myself to come to Mali in OK
You know you can't even bring your own food.
Malis or take salt from them.
Li gen tansè resell li tout chemen
It's not the same as chemen.
Everything is a brat's own thing.
We've done everything we can to get the book published.
Bouki passe vin à deux malis is the name given to a type of wine.
Mali di tongou and m bakou m and apale
I've never known of any disease in my life.
On Monday, we will take a look at what we can do.
It's the same person.
I'm going to tell you something.
There are people who have been in my life who have been able to pick up a book and go to the country.
Li up the bouki apwal
I'm going to pick up the book and I'm going to print it.
I've come to the end of my life.
Some people think that's a good thing.
Those who are in Tonboukib are in Tonboukib knowing that I will be able to climb the mountain and will be comforted by the salt.
I'm ahead of you.
I'm going to get up in the morning while I'm going to get up in the morning.
It's a great way to celebrate.
They're coming in front of you, too.
They almost died.
I'm going to try and get back to you again.
That's what I'm going to do.
or ak costa
They're going to do it.
They're going to be in the same shape as you.
The gene is cell-like
The timing of the book is quite different.
The men had put the salt in their mouths.
I've known a lot about the disease since before.
Prana Malis is the best doctor in the world.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it up to you, but I'm sure I'll be able to make it up to you.
They are so generous that they can even take advantage of the set.
I'm going to take this and I'm going to take this and I'm going to take this and I'm going to take this and I'm going to take this and I'm going to take this and I'm going to take this and I'm going to take this and I'm going to take this and I'm going to take this and I'm going to take this and I'm going to take this and I'm going to take this and I'm going to take this and I'm going to take this and I'm going to go
Men who live in other parts of the world know me very well.
Malis is completely dead.
Money or money.
I'm just saying that I'm not.
I could even say that the men of Malis were able to take a zepon from the men.
I'm not going to be able to keep up with you guys.
I'm going to take a shower.
Malis short zepon
It's a man's world and he's a man's world.
That's how it's going to happen.
On the other side of the river, you can go down there.
This is a bouki pou antre
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
Landre enters here.
It's time to move on.
The end of the world has come to an end.
rentre nan pak la rentre nan pak la rentre nan pak la rentre nan pak la rentre nan pak la rentre nan pak la rentre nan pak la rentre nan pak la rentre nan pak la rentre nan pak la rentre nan pak la rentre nan pak la rentre nan pak la rentre nan pak la rentre and rentre nan pak la rentre and rentre nan pak la rentre and rentre nan pak la rentre and rentre nan pak la rentre and rentre nan
It's time to move on.
The men of the village are from the village of Bouki.
When I was a kid, I wanted to drink wine.
They're giving me a chance to get into the book right now.
I'm going to send you a message or something.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
That's how they came to this world and they got the job done.
This is why I can't drink wine personally.
If you want to take a book about the importance of the book, you can use it in a good way.
It's a good way to get the book out.
It can take a few minutes for men to get to know each other.
I'm going to buy you a big book and you're going to buy me a big one.
They took the ban on me.
They are in front of the book.
Do you have a book or two?
Men bouki men for now i ap manye
Bouki tout li has a code of conduct.
This is why I'm here to tell you that I'm not a bad person.
I'm not going to lie.
Even those who know the book and the book can't help themselves.
Li elimen m to the canbive
Li jenn bouki kachon kote
Bouki wine is derived from so li di route ton bouki
You know how I feel about my parents.
All the men and women who have been given the right to vote.
I'm not going to be able to do this right now.
I'm in the middle of something right now.
Boukive mali di wi
They are still alive today.
Now look at the children of the same men.
They're coming in if they can.
You've got even the smallest amount of money.
Malis is even malen
They're not even ready to take a bath.
For the sake of the priests, I will pray to you.
Malis took them and brought them to me.
I'm going to bring it up.
It can even be used to measure the size of the lens.
For a moment or two now, I'm a
I'm going to fix it with my money so I can do it.
I wrote a letter to him.
There are two types of locusts.
I've heard that you're sitting in a new room and you're taking a break.
Even if you come or know that you are swimming, you can take a bath.
After taking a meal, take a drink and I'll send you a souvenir.
bouki wè nou nou
They won the things they wanted to do.
The men were in a coma.
Desanmi kate jon bakay gen vè
They are constructed so that they can respond to each other.
John is a receiver.
It's not me.
If you want to make a wine, you have to make a wine.
I'm in the process of trying to kill the Malis.
We're either going to make a phone call or we're going to make a phone call.
It's not like we're going to make a ton of noise.
You're going to go through it, you're going to be OK, you're going to be OK, you're going to be OK, you're going to be OK, you're going to be OK, you're going to be OK, you're going to be OK, you're going to be OK, you're going to be OK, you're going to be OK, you're going to be OK, you're going to be OK, you're going to be OK, you're going to be OK, you're going to
It can be covered with a layer of glass.
I've been told that I can't do anything against my father's attorney.
They're not going to be able to do it.
I asked my father if he could do anything about it.
I've never been able to do anything new.
Go to the men's clubs.
It's a long way from anything in the world.
I'm going to pass it on to you.
My father was a slave of men.
I can't help but wonder.
You think you're going to be deformed.
young with the father of God on the road and on the way.
Malis is a young father of God and his soul.
It's all right.
I'm not going to lie to God before I get married.
with the living soul in a state of degradation.
They're not going to be able to pick you up.
Because they don't want to make a ball or make a fight, they're there.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
I don't know what to do with myself.
It invites all those who come to it.
The men were given a great opportunity to work with me.
It's not the same person.
The men of Malis came to his home.
All the people bouki riv
It's a great way to get to the ball.
bouki ap bay
I'm going to do it.
It's time to get the ball rolling.
bouki prak ap fe bal
For other cards.
This is why I asked Sezim.
Under me is Sezim.
It's the kind of zipper that's going to make a big difference in the world.
Anma Vèyman is a se
You can steal them.
They're going to have to deal with M and Mak Seyi's problems.
I don't know if I'm going to win.
white desan reyisyan desanl
Yo plen batwa mango epi pou yo became a foreign peer
While I was there, I became a stranger.
Men during the white riv
During the course of the tagri mosen there was a gap in my life.
But there may be more to it than that.
If you want to buy it, you have to buy it.
While you're at it, you'll want to get a ball of water.
Yo pranme the language of Govou
You're on your way to the sea.
If you send mangoes to your mother when she's ready and you're ready, she'll be ready to fight.
buy an vale bak la
And the throne of the Lord shall be cast into the sea.
I think it's going to rain in the ocean.
Buying a valley is a good thing.
to buy a valley of misye.
One of my friends is also a great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-
Blanche a plunge in the lamè a fou
I'm going to buy anvale blan tou
Blan rivann and batou lè a
Rivenn femis sa y sant ti ta supports
You're going to get a lot of attention quickly.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
There's nothing new here.
It's not a ton of Ayisyen.
Men chak jou k ap bwet lev
chak jou l leve se byet lèv
The husbands' wives are not in the army.
It's easy to drink while you're on a diet.
I'm going to try to get them to drink.
Men, when you take a bra, always drink alcohol, but I don't drink for my own money.
While drinking for your soul.
I couldn't sleep with my wife and drink.
You're going to have to put it up.
A second mission is to dress up as a missionary.
The missions are quickly disrupted by the photo.
Sanyen Benye is completely wiped out.
Pannan san benyen men
It's not like I'm doing anything like this.
I'm not a missionary, but I'm going to help you.
It's hard to believe that we're still here.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to keep my head up.
Or put it on the floor.
I grew up with my wife.
I've been waiting for my wife to come to me.
They said Oh dear
I'm sorry about the head.
I told them I loved them so much that I knew about myself.
With the wife of Oh
Or ask yourself or yourself how you feel.
You're the only one who knows what's going on.
I don't care if you have a seat or a mouth on your head.
It's in the shop.
It's the same with Malfini and Pi.
It's nice to be able to help people compete with you.
There's no one else to help you.
This is my soul.
How to use your teeth.
The soul itself is not affected by the li non Sa brother as
Al a fini
At the end of the day, it's all about me.
On jou Li sou m plye for this or do a lot of things I have to do to make a copy of the gay app below.
They're doing it for you.
It's not like I'm going to make a mistake.
I'm going to give them a short conference call.
It's a very short conference call.
I'm going to cook it.
They're doing the same thing.
For the twelfth time I will be there.
They're going to kill me.
I'm going to tell you a story about a boy and a girl.
Li rejiyen l alid lonje men l
The Pope took a copy of it.
It's not like I'm getting cold.
He is also a member of the board of directors of Fòt Boudak.
The men are badyon for me.
There is no one who is a descendant of Leviathan.
The child is born with a child's level.
The children of the wine generation.
The son of the great wine-maker.
the great-grandson of Abel.
The son of the great man is truly a man of many talents.
You're a good cook for men.
This is the case of the anpa chonm rive konsan
You have reached your destination.
Who's going to see this?
and jou bon kok
I'm sure you'll find someone who can help you.
It's the same with men.
I'm going to keep them.
I'm going to pick up the slack.
I'm going to pick up the coconut.
Men and women make plop plop plop plop
They're going up the stairs.
The men are the same person.
They're both alive.
There are two patitigations.
I've been waiting for her to come back.
Because I'm interested in the people of my country.
There is no such thing as a bad thing that is outside of the business.
Let's get to the bottom of this.
They're a great team.
I know how hard it is for me to do something like this.
It's not the end of the world.
This is a site that will be around for a long time to come.
You'll have to come with me.
In the meantime, we're going to have to go to the bathroom.
The first step is to prepare yourself for the next one.
It's a great way to work for the elderly.
These men are adults.
I can't give it to my grandchildren.
I know you've always been a wine man.
Leve pou y al legliz
I'll be there for you on Sunday.
I came here to call you Gran Gran Gran Gran
I'll be there in four or four in the morning.
The grandmother replied, "Well done".
It's only four o'clock in the morning.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
Depending on the confession or grandfather.
chak jou vini rete.
I'm going to get my money's worth.
In the morning, you'll be able to come to a meeting.
I came to call Grandmother Grandmother when I was three in the morning and Grandmother answered me again.
Even the children of Bawal who have met met their husbands.
Because you don't want me to make a conversion for you.
Wine, blood, morning wine is called Granm Granm di.
Or at least 4 grand in bidit men
Convisyon men at a.
Gete, chak jou like this, chak jou like this.
Now that you're a kid, if you're a kid and you're a kid, come and get me.
My grandmother never left me with a gallon.
My grandmother as a great-grandmother since then has had no children of her own.
I don't know if my grandmother will die soon.
Since the grandmother's arrival, the grandmother has taken in the same way as the receptionist.
I'm confessing to being polite to him.
I'm not happy about it.
You're not going to be able to do it because you know where it is.
Yeah, well, that's right, I'm not going to lie to you.
One of the people who don't take these people.
You don't have to wait until you've had a good time.
It's all about the people.
What is the meaning of the word "slave"?
How do you feel about crying?
For crying out loud, for crying out loud.
Don't you know if I'm with you or not?
It's been a long time coming, hasn't it?
I am anplye couto gen nan y pou foubi l, pou foubi l jizka sken senyen.
That, I like a dis or divalye divalye an.
Gen yon disease to the gen m, to the gen m like chak apremi di so w to the gen m, lafè yo.
I'm going to have to go back to the drawing board.
After that, you'll have to go back to the drawing board.
There are many people who know how to cook a bunch of rice, a bunch of chicken, a bunch of chicken.
When I am sick, I can also help you with a love song.
Great men, in one man's mind, we have no right to know or to eat water to make a ban.
Who are you and who do you think you are?
They're going to blow you up.
I'm going to tell someone else to blow the whistle anonymously.
You don't want to blow your ass.
Men, back, now dirig gonfle man an, or re a, gonfle man an role, chavnen chat yon an.
Even though it's hard to tell who's the boss, if you know who's the boss, you've got a long way to go.
Then there is another member of the grenyë de touk an ban m grenyë
Connive your button or they're all men.
I don't know what else to do anymore.
It's made of granite.
It's the same as the granite in the bottle.
Koum nèvi sèm anpye m, ou ye, an kounm gen such as led dat solè, or konn gon bann ti bay li vizit.
I don't know how long it's been.
I'll see you on the other side.
The new banj tralè is now available.
You don't have to be a kid in the first place.
Takou I will take a new move
It's time for you to take on a new challenge and take on a new one.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you.
You see, they've got a lot of other things going on.
If you know what I'm talking about, you know what I'm talking about.
The people know, OK, pile.
The people who know the things that are going on in the world around them are not going to get away with it.
If they do, people will feel sorry for them.
She was born with the same name.
Or at the very least, I can't do it again.
I'm going to tell you who I am.
I can tell you exactly what I'm saying.
Many ante akouche yo, gen defa moun nan, ay, pa kontan n datmi an pi, fè yon movèy kouche.
Men know your brother.
There are nine of you in the men's section.
The person who advances a
Men are men who live together.
No matter what the person is born to do, even if it happens, they are born to do so.
I'm looking forward to seeing you again.
Who do you think you're talking to?
Well, there are times when people don't want to hold you, but I don't.
And what are you going to do with your children?
The seventh word that I love.
I don't know where I'm going from here.
After the concert, there's nothing wrong with that.
And then there's the tea.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
It's just a lot of people who don't know what they're doing.
My father and I have children.
Li gen dwan bagen an pri men
What's the point of having children?
For vandiyan an, or for childbirth, yo se yon sè, monmi l, yon monmi milk.
Pan, there's a guy named Koulal.
Like, e OK, who are you?
Lately, like a man, I'm going to use German simen, li pa nou, people are going to call lalokay, lalokay, okay, people are going to term.
I'm going to have a problem with it, and I'm not going to be able to handle it.
Pralè will not be able to say a single word.
I'm not going to tell you what to do about it.
It's hard to say when people will be able to get a job.
Give such a man as he is in the palace, the palace, the palace.
Chak know a, sa fli bay chak know a yo, pi anrile.
And the other men were there, and I was there.
Le Bel autre jan.
I, nor dregle, men, am at the same time without your tongue.
And like the likes of those who know fin ansen
There are so many of you that are still here.
There is no wine in it.
That's why I'm here.
There are hundreds of elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, elephants, eleph
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you
The rest of you don't know me anymore, Anna and the Three Angels.
Often times, people who do something like this don't want to feel like they're doing something like that.
Gen gen kok kok prouse, m, kok kok prouse, o Bala, I will praise the people of this world, and I will praise the people of this world.
OUkebe, I'm under no obligation to do the work, the commander, to show that I'm up and running.
In order to prase saj for la, li gafwon an Liwif li w, even ba la, orye.
If you don't have the money, you're going to lose the money, and you're going to lose the money.
This is a blessing.
I've been blessed.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again.
In the name of Peter.
w ap di vin on the floor
What's the bottom of the wine?
The bottom of the vin blese is already.
When I was a child of Malimin, I came from Ladass.
The blanch li is derived from the same gizell
It's also very short.
I'm not sure what I'm looking for.
It can be used by men or women.
It's like a good thread so I can try it.
They're still women.
Gra women men.
Do you want to work with Jan?
Blessed m, even bay, even bay.
I don't think anyone has ever known a foot, foot or a foot to eat so much, so I put a set or two on it.
Now we have a king.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
I'm going to end up with the last man and the last woman.
It's the only way to live.
Li gen dwe aleve under the buo ya or la
There must be a way to get to the bottom of it.
They know how to do it all the time.
It's like a pig's mouth.
I'm going to do this for you.
How to make money.
Or brawou a ton leve gen lefwa, lefwa by aleven nou tou, a kanleven by this man or that man?
Klo, lefwa rele इत jan ankan, button, se menm bayaj, nou, gwo button, lifwa rele la ap se tou, se tou yon yon sotiy.
I'm going to set up a table so that I can hold you up or down, so that I can take everything away from you.
The button is still there.
Button all you need to touch.
They don't consume tonk gratè yo
or thank you
I'm still here for you.
I'm so grateful to you for your help.
Thank you very much.
in or out of it.
How do you know if you're going to make it to the next level, and how do you know if you're going to make it to the next level?
Did you know that there was no such thing as an abyss swabell, or did you know that there was no such thing as an infant, so what did you know?
Men, as you know, I'm either a man or a woman.
I've always wanted to do something different.
Or I'll give you two.
It's too white.
I'll be there for you.
I'll give you a room.
such as ta rache
It's like a racket and it's like you're on a train like a doctor.
M for eight.
We're going to do it or we're going to manufacture it.
Anpalande fabri y ap a ve
Go ahead and get your hands on it.
The people who know the garden are the ones who are responsible for it.
After all, either you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you, or you,
They know what they're doing, they know what they're doing, they know what they're doing, they know what they're doing, they know what they're doing, they know what they're doing, they know what they're doing, they know what they're doing.
I can't wait to get back to you, and I can't wait to get back to you, and I can't wait to get back to you.
I was sick.
I've known people for a long time.
I don't know what to do with my face.
There's a bunch of people in my face.
There are a lot of great people out there.
I'm going to take the next step.
I was born in Magayou, Peru.
I'm confused as to what you're doing with my hair.
There are people who make me crazy.
A lot of people or a lot of people.
There is no such thing as a human being.
It's all about the people, the people, the people.
And then there's the fact that they're not going to be able to keep up with what's going on.
I'm going to be a rabbi.
I'm a rabbon man, but I'm not one of those people who can get away with anything.
En by an en tesse yon malpwa.
It's like someone's going to walk.
It's like a genome that passes through the skin, and it's like a grain of salt that passes through the skin.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
If you say, even if you don't, or if you are passionate about your life, you will die.
An betti santi
I've always wanted to do something.
Such as on water or in the air.
I'm on top of it.
I'll see you on the other side.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to live well, if I'm not going to be able to live well, if I'm not going to be able to live well or if I'm not going to be able to live well or if I'm not going to be able to live well or if I'm not going to be able to live well or if I'm not going to be able to live well or if I'm not going to be able to live well or if I'm not going to be able to live well.
Men can and do.
I'm going to retire and I'm going to leave Kras.
It's like having a pencil on the table.
It's like when you're in a bad mood, when you're in a bad mood, when you're in a bad mood, when you're in a bad mood, when you're in a bad mood, when you're in a bad mood, when you're in a bad mood, when you're in a bad mood, when you're in a bad mood, when you're in a bad mood, when you're in a bad mood, when you're in a bad mood.
And if you don't take the pass, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take the grape, take
If I were to tell you, who would tell you what to do or what to do about it?
Among the men of the people.
They won't be able to do anything like that.
They may even be able to drink too much.
If there is such a thing as a leaf, if there is such a thing as a leaf, then it is a leaf.
Kou di Metyen is the only one.
I'm going to have a drink and I'm going to have a drink and I'm going to have a drink and I'm going to have a drink and I'm going to have a drink and I'm going to have a drink and I'm going to have a drink and I'm going to have a drink and I'm going to have a drink and I'm going to have a drink and I'm going to have a drink and I'm going to have a drink and I'm going to have a drink and I'm going to have a drink and
The vision of the deity is to drink it.
I'm not afraid of people who are in extreme poverty.
lansent koz a lansent a a
I'm not going to say anything about it.
I know someone I'm going to send a message to.
A woman was there.
As a result, the doctor is unable to cure a herb, so the pills are used to treat it.
So, if I want to do it again, I'm going to do it.
And then there's the tizanm, and the compound.
They're going to kill people like you, and they're going to take you, and they're going to kill you, and they're going to kill you, and they're going to kill you, and they're going to kill you, and they're going to kill you, and they're going to kill you, and they're going to kill you, and they're going to kill you, and they're going to kill you, and they're going to kill you, and they're going to kill you, and they're going to kill you
I'm going to have a drink with you and you're going to have a drink with me and I'm going to have a drink with you before you go.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do, but I'm going to tell you what to do before I get there.
It's like a, it's a, it's a, it's not too much.
And, of course, that's what it is.
I've been listening to a lot of people.
I'm going to tell you something.
Or you could say that you're not going to be able to do it.
Since then I've been doing a lot of things in my life.
You can do what you want to do with your life.
They've got a lot of men.
I can make a renmet do y, choose a man to be there, me.
The message can't be heard.
Thank you very much for doing this.
I know you're sorry for what you've done to me.
I'll take what I can do to make you feel better.
There's no way of knowing how much they're worth.
yo met loul ladan
From the bottom to the bottom.
In Germany, you can also talk to a lot of people in Germany.
I know that you've got a lot to say, even if it's not true.
Fwon lok po man.
Takou is the one who knows me well.
I know what I'm going to take or what I'm going to buy.
I'm going to put on something I'm just going to believe in.
I'm going to tell you something.
What's the matter with you?
Like when a person finishes a couche, before something else is done, they close the person up.
Where are you going with the rest of you?
One day I'll tell you one day I'll tell the people what to do.
The people of your country will listen to you.
The people also met Adap and sailed behind him.
I'm going to leave everything there.
Leave a pocket or throw everything away as soon as possible.
What's the matter with you?
It's like rapping on a rock or a hard place.
All of us are here to help.
You can make a big bison.
It's not that we don't want to make people laugh, it's that we all want to be together.
I'm going to tell you something anonymously.
It's in your hands.
It's not that I don't want to say goodbye to men.
Grandpa, since you're doing your own thing, I'm doing my own thing.
Took a lot of time to think about it.
Towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou towou
I'm going to do the same thing.
They don't even know what they're talking about.
There are many other ways to do this.
I'm going to make a copy.
I'm not sure what's going on here.
They don't know how I'm going to do it.
The position of this two-legged golfer is one-legged.
I'm still very young.
Because I was born to do so.
It is the birthday of the men.
I'm not sure how I'm going to make it when I'm born.
It's your birthday.
How can you relate to the soul of someone born to do a thing?
I'm not going to take it for granted.
It's time to take good care of yourself.
Take it easy on yourself.
It's good for you.
Take it easy on yourself.
When a child is first born, they are first born.
I'm really excited about it.
When the child grows up, I ask things.
They need to be able to isolate themselves.
I don't want to give up on you.
I walked with you and I kept the bar when I walked with you.
When the child grows up, the child will not be able to make a living.
Prole or I'll let you back in.
In the meantime, don't talk about gender or the ability of women to interfere with men, but respect them.
Sa ou ka gen yon la, or ka gen yon in you, m aleve.
So I don't know if I'm going to make a big move, but I'm going to take the lead.
Hey, who knows, parizal, how old are you and what do you do with your luggage?
If I only drank so much, I'd drink too much.
You've done a lot of other things.
Or do I know myself?
It's not my dad's fault.
I'm going to tell you all about it.
My father and I are very proud of him.
Nan antien ladyen, do you two anti se adult yo cleve yo an sa?
I know where the plates are.
It's about the people who can make a difference in the world.
Enter into the sentiman.
I've traveled this long way before.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do
Because the person who understands what they are doing is the one who does it.
What do you know about it?
On the other hand, there is a woman in the back seat of the car, or a bus.
After ordering it again, they ate it again.
M, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m,
If I don't want to do it, I don't want to do it, or I don't want to do it, I don't want to do it.
M ap bat li, I'm still here with you.
In other words, what are you doing again?
Yo kane doube
What do you think?
Didn't I tell you how to take the advice of your brother, who gave you the orders?
And on the one hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand,
I'm sure you'll find a lot of people who don't like wine.
Anyone who touches the stone will be able to climb to the top of the hill.
I'm not going to tell you what I'm going to tell you.
There is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there is no rain, there
There is no such thing as a free lunch and there is no such thing as a free lunch.
I've got a couple of skeletons to sell.
Jan tali an an
I'm not an adult anymore.
It's good to see that you're on the right track.
A man who is not born to marry a bach is born to a man who is not born to marry a bach.
I'm not allowed to get married and have children.
It's a personal thing to do.
They live in such a state that they are at ease, unmarried, unmarried, and have no children.
It is more common in older adults.
I've never seen an adult face like this before.
I'm old enough to know better.
Or an older person's face.
And a man who has grown up in the ventank area before marrying you, has a reputation.
I don't know what you mean by bwayitou, voye, jenn bway.
You're going to have to do four recessions.
There are a lot of great people.
I feel like I'm in the middle of something and I need to know what it is.
I'm going to have to change my mind about it.
Take someone for example as someone who is standing behind the debou tonm as one who is sow ap jwon anj vwel.
What, or what, or how many more dollars?
Are you going to camp for a week or two?
Is it my fault, or is it my fault, or is it my fault?
Li, or li, is not to be confused with a soul.
What's the matter?
I'm not going to tell you what to do, but I'm going to tell you what to do, and I'm going to tell you what to do, and I'm going to tell you what to do.
They're coming to me.
But, wi men, li dwa pa met wanga, m as si chance or pa la avan.
Or wouy chansyou allez avèm
I've been working on the farm for a long time.
Or at least I've met a lot of people.
I didn't know that before.
I don't even know if I'm going to be able to take it or not.
I'm going to do the same thing to Sentel.
People can learn from a child to a child to become an adult too old to learn something new.
Now my grandfather is my grandfather.
I'm a grown man and I'm a mother.
I'm not sure what's going on here.
It's not like I'm a kid anymore.
They're going to kill them.
My grandfather's grandfather is back and I'm so excited to be here.
It's a lot of older people.
Is there anything I can do for you, or for me, or for you, or for you, or for me, or for you, or for me, or for you, or for me, or for you, or for me, or for you, or for me, or for you, or for me, or for you, or for me, or for you, or for me, or for you, or for me, or for you, or for me?
Wi, what am I doing here?
Li, li regle l or noch chanch.
Men, do you like me?
Are they adichon nou?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
If you're going to do it, you're going to do it.
It will be your wedding day.
Or two pran de tant
Rakand li your other leg?
If I can say, if I can do it, I can do it.
What is the meaning of the word acoupitou?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
We're not going to tell you anything.
Tell me what you've been up to.
Ouy al koujou is such a thing.
How am I supposed to feel?
I don't know what to say, I don't know what to say, I don't know what to say, I don't know what to say, I don't know what to say, I don't know what to say, I don't know what to say, I don't know what to say, I don't know what to say, I don't know what to say, I don't know what to say.
When someone is in charge of a brick-and-mortar garage, two people are in charge.
He knows what he's doing.
Fanse an pou w or drink se Komiise
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it to Baja a.
That's how I'm going to do it.
It's a dream come true!
Is there anyone who can see this, or is there anyone who can see it?
Or do you see me?
Or I'm going to come.
When a woman falls asleep, she is able to give birth.
I'm sure you'll be able to do a lot of things if you're ready.
It's time to get distracted.
There are no women's orders.
We'll see you in March.
They've been walking far and wide.
Men are delicate and delicate.
The crime is to kill or kill.
The menu is as follows:
It's always there or there.
Menza, or do I have the head or do I have the mouth?
I can't wait to see the people's vision.
Think of it as something that's going to happen, something that's going to happen, something that's going to happen, something that's going to happen, something that's going to happen, something that's going to happen, something that's going to happen, something that's going to happen, something that's going to happen, something that's going to happen, or something that's going to happen.
What kind of a relationship is this?
I'm going to sleep.
How can you tell if I'm doing something?
It's a very old story.
What's the matter with you guys?
Jan or two or two or two or one hour or even two can't stand to be with someone like Jan or two can't stand to be with you.
Bouchi pa lave
It's not like I'm going to go to the bathroom or the bathroom.
The two characters seem to be of interest to me.
One or two of the people who are interested in the topic are the people who are interested in the topic.
Or ramoun, or ramoun sa, or anyone who is not interested in a new wine without it.
In this way, they kill the rice.
I'm going to take my room to the owner's room.
It's on your way.
The children will be able to talk to each other again and again.
Are you going to take me?
It's like you're sending me to my group.
I'm not going to lie again.
Or in an ankle bracelet.
On the mat kite l
on the metric system.
I'm sorry, but what do you think?
Hi, I'm going to bed again.
If I know you, why can't I see you again, why not?
It is possible that one can or can teach one another.
It's so easy to get lost in two people.
One or two things can happen.
You've got a lot on your plate.
I'll tell you what I'm going to do.
And how can we not have another team or two or do the same thing once or twice in a row?
Men, up and down?
It can be used in a variety of ways.
Kouman and Bagal.
You know where your phone is.
I'm looking forward to seeing you again.
Before the sun goes down.
Or need like I've met rad sunshine in my life.
You're going to have a lot of fun with it and you're going to have a lot of fun with it.
Or they'll hear you.
They're going to have to pay for it.
This can be done with children.
We are committed to children's health and well-being.
If you've never been there before, you've been there, you've been there, you've been there, you've been there.
O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord,
These are the people you're talking about.
Too many people, too many on the other side, why can't I see you?
I'm going to run the ball dry right now?
Or, perhaps even more so, where do you have so many friends?
I've always wanted to do something about it.
Don't you know what you're going to say?
Yes, I'm going to tell you.
You are also a team member.
K ap gaden Bonri yon swan thing is a ban on the person or the tou
I can't wait for you to come back.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
woulewo knows a
I'm going to tell you about it.
Everyone has to pay for it.
Others are very big.
I'm too old or too old to do this.
I don't know what to do now.
Amendments have been made to save me.
It's either that or it's that.
I'm going to tell you, you're going to tell me, you're going to tell me, you're going to tell me, you're going to tell me, you're going to tell me, you're going to tell me, you're going to tell me, you're going to tell me, you're going to tell me, you're going to tell me, you're going to tell me, you're going to tell me, you're going to tell me, you're going to tell me, you're going to tell
If, like Zion's people, you steal mostly people, you steal from me, you see police, you steal from me!
It's not like you're going to have a good time.
Now you can break the grat yo pa kandizat
We're going to have a good time.
There are people out there who don't want to do anything.
There is a problem with the genesis of a large number of problems.
They are even more important when it comes to people with disabilities.
What's the matter with your teeth?
What do you think of me?
If anyone asks me a question, I want to know.
Ap or genit an jeremi konnye a
I'm going to tell you a good one.
Achilles is a good man, or Achilles is a good man?
It can happen to anyone.
It's like li la.
I came back from there and went back to where I wanted to go.
I'm going to do it first.
Ever since I've been with someone I've been pilgriming to.
It is derived from the Greek word l.
I'll be back in two days and I'll be back in two days.
If I'm going to leave, I'm going to leave, I'm going to leave, I'm going to leave, I'm going to leave, I'm going to leave, I'm going to leave, I'm going to leave, I'm going to leave, I'm going to leave, I'm going to leave, I'm going to go, I'm going to go, I'm going to go, I'm going to go, I'm going to go, I'm going, I'm going, I'm
On ban nmi such as t ap pale la
There are so many people who stand up for me so I'm going to do it.
I'm so excited to be able to do what I want to do.
Or I'll tell you what to do!
Aklòd yon kadyan anpil ap repouche yo, mè kadyo toule do, wi.
Like the machine of your Jeremiah.
I'm going to get out of here.
It's time to tell you how to do it.
Like your car, Jeremiah's car that you're going to hit me with?
And like a man, if you're going to do all the things you're supposed to do, then before you do anything, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait,
If I could cross six corners, would I be able to do it, or would I be able to do it?
First of all, I'm going to be a good messenger and then I'm going to be a good runner.
What's the matter with you?
Or, come on, where are you going?
Or it's just a matter of time.
I can think of a fan of kids, take a little bit of that, and then I'll take a shower, I'll take a shower, I'll take a shower, I'll take a shower.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
If you don't want to, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can't, you can'
Soy l'te prete ou, bagalè or fini, is a birthday.
Can I bring it to you?
Or should I bring them?
That's the same thing every day.
Yo covered the mangwa a
Where do you want to go or where do you want to go?
If someone is standing there, and if they are on the other side of the door, if they are standing there, they will pass.
Kou de plase or take a pass?
Men, lov konmagay, do as I know you do.
It's the same thing or the same thing.
There is a ban on entering the house.
Or hit the door.
Or like doing something.
Or do something like that.
Like if I made you a pun.
I want to make or drink water.
I'm going to drink some water.
Adlè w'ap to do the same.
I can't wait to see what happens next.
I'm starting to think about it.
I'm going to the country.
I'm on the other side.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you right now.
It's my birthday.
I'm going to take myself as if I'm going to die.
Or to pass a konbou in such a manner as to celebrate the feast.
I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know,
What about the other day?
What's the matter with you?
I'm with you.
And all the same bay, when by ekstab, like the beast la pavlè machye wap doing so, and so I'm going to ap the radi l.
If you don't come up with something new, and you don't know what you're doing, leave it alone.
One or two pools are on the winning side.
Or do you need it, or do you want it, or do you want it back?
Gondyam is the only person who knows what he is capable of.
Well, I don't know.
It's like this.
Obzenm such a wine that you can make me feel like I've never made it before.
It's as if I've never heard of it again.
Or they'll want to coach me again.
It's like I'm in a bad shape.
What do you do or what do you do?
What's wrong with your legs?
Now, at the end of the day, we're going to have to do something about it.
What are you doing again?
Agan now.
Yo de kouche w avann akoufèm wè a, dek mache.
You don't know who I am.
or gen guitar
It's not just about the people.
O joun o moun
Do you want to know what's going on?
Is it possible for you to learn to play the guitar?
Why can't I get you out of here and teach you to play your guitar?
You've done a lot of things before, and you've done a lot of things before.
It's going to be another January.
I don't know how to take everything or li
Or I'll learn what it's worth.
And now we have a new way of looking at things.
You're going to have to pay for it.
Or before we respond to what we're doing differently.
Who's doing this?
If it's worth it, calculate the value.
You will be able to reflect them to you and reflect them to you.
A person from Sout
This is a man's dream.
You've got a lot to do with it.
Have you seen Goud?
How do you do it?
How do you know that?
What's the point?
There are two ways to do this, aren't there?
You're going to have to tell someone something.
Men are well-versed in a new way of life.
the shape of a
I can't wait to get back to you.
OU Konn appon in the work is for someone to be able to communicate with me and I will be able to communicate with you.
I've always wanted to be a part of something new, and I've always wanted to be a part of something new.
It's not like you're going to be able to do it.
I know that you're not alone.
I'm going to tell you the truth.
He never answered my question.
I can't wait to see what happens next.
I'm not going to lie.
They're not going to take it anymore.
No one has the right to do something like this without the right to drink tea.
You've put your soul into it.
They're not going to change things, they're going to change themselves.
I'll replace you like a cup of tea.
And children need to be taught what to do, don't they?
Or I've been through a series of debay's, men, or I've been through a series of debay's, or I don't know.
And I'm sure you'll know what's ahead of you and what's going on.
They don't know who they are, they don't know who they are, they don't know who they are, they don't know who they are, they don't know who they are, they don't know who they are, they don't know who they are, they don't know who they are, they don't know who they are, they don't know who they are, they don't know who they are, they don't know who they are, they don't know who they are, they don't know who they are,
And then there's the people.
It's not like I don't know what to do with myself.
Some of the people who have made this beast have never been able to replace it.
When it comes down to it, there is no one else.
I don't know what I'm going to do, but I'm always going to do what I'm going to do.
W ap such as sou t ap derived from la ou te gen en
Or you're going to die.
on things you can carry.
It is possible to leave or leave.
They're on their way to you.
I can't help but wonder.
We have been working together since Fon Bagga Devann and
It's the people who do it.
I'm going to do a little bit more of this.
They've been there since Fon Bagga's arrival.
We've got a lot of people who want to do that too.
It's a bit of a struggle with enthusiasm.
I'm going to do the same concert, even if I do it in front of you, but don't make mistakes.
I know, they're in the middle of it, they're in the middle of it.
What's your order?
But how do I know what to do?
What's the matter with you?
How am I supposed to feel?
One of them is a man.
They can't get away with it.
It's all right with me.
They have the right to live with me.
There are two phones to be used to pay the bills, and I know that there are two phones to be used to pay the bills.
They have the right to live with you.
They have the right to live with him or her.
There is only one Mèt Dam.
I can't stand it like that.
Anpour anse of people can or can't.
There is no such thing as a man or a woman.
It's either that or it's that.
I'm happy and happy.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it through the next few days.
What's the matter with you?
When it comes down to it, there's no such thing as a man or a woman.
As a matter of fact, you're either cashing in or out.
You're in the same boat.
There will be a time when humans will no longer exist.
I'm going to be on the pro side and I'm going to be on the pro side.
and a cousin.
You can't do that.
An emphasis or a contentment.
I'm not going to do anything about it.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm not going to lie to you.
I know what I'm doing.
They're happy, but they're sorry, they're sorry.
And if it comes to me again, for something that belongs to me, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and,
I'm not a member of the party.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
I'm going to tell you how to get out of here.
They are banned from doing so.
I'm going to do this again.
That's what I'm going to do.
I don't want to do that now.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I don't want to do this kind of thing.
Now I can catch fish I don't want to.
Now I want to make my own way, or do it.
Go ahead and talk to someone who knows a little bit about me.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Everything is new to me.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do next.
There's no such thing as a lily.
Tell me what you've been up to and what you've been up to.
Will you be married again?
They are born in heaven.
It's not the same person.
I've seen the net.
A path can lead to a man's death.
If you have a wife who lives with you, your wife has a lot of responsibilities.
Or are there a lot of problems?
It's the only thing that makes me feel like I'm a man.
If he knows who the two of you are, he'll be the same person as the two of you.
And then there's the early days.
Ap pale voye voye
The people of the North.
Condon and Morelès te vay Badè a.
What can I do for you?
I'll be able to interact with the radio after you've won another broadcast again.
How do I get people to be members of my team?
I can intercept the radio.
They won't be able to do anything else on the radio.
It's been a while.
If it is bad, they are going to tell Ouri Pòdya a, Echèl, they know Pòdya bon, Ouri.
If you're a stranger or a man, you're a man, and you're a man.
Sell people who know or know you're going to win.
You know everything about men.
Sanmi m bagen rad pou mete
sanmi m bagen sejou
There is no such thing as too much.
The students will be able to attend the concert, which will be held on the first floor.
The app will appear on your or a plam.
The cell will appear.
I've been on the road ever since.
Now I'm talking about things that I can sleep on.
I don't know, but I'm going to ask you why you're here.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I live with them.
If you don't want to go home, you don't even know who you are.
Sol and Jan do what they do.
I'm here to help you get to Emmafot.
Bat kont chou t ap m m vin
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do when I get there.
I can't wait to get back to you.
Yon tweet, I'm going to say goodbye.
You're in the middle of it.
There are many things to do in life.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
There is no order.
They're on the verge of collapse.
La tandi se mang de bien te or wi
It's the same generation of people.
The men who won the t ap bay li.
I'm going to tell you a story.
You've got a lot of people around you.
They are everywhere on paper, even if it's too late.
I've been waiting for a decade.
It's the same person who's been there.
I'm going to be the chief spokesperson.
There is no problem with the anti-anxiety of an asylum even if there is no problem with Nanbala now.
Are you a member of the cause?
I'm a good person, are you good?
Gen moun denm
In a cup of coffee 3 the same is said to be the case.
I've been fooled.
Who are we?
Noah and Kedi, so you can go.
Win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win, win,
Yo pa kondin Deja ga yo and ouwi.
Many of the children grew up with Giyon Polli.
What kind of child is a two-year-old?
I'm like a child with a child.
Like a child.
You're an adult and you've got a lot of things going on.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
I'm going to say something or something that will make me want to do something else that I can do for a year.
It's been a while.
What do you think I'm going to do?
Men, men, I delvi l.
What's the matter with you guys, what's the matter with you guys?
It's the only thing that matters.
You are the same person.
Give me a tip and I'll give you a tip and I'll give you a tip and I'll give you a tip and I'll give you a tip and I'll give you a tip and I'll give you a tip and I'll give you a tip and I'll give you a tip and I'll give you a tip and I'll give you a tip and I'll give you a tip and I'll give you a tip and I'll give you a tip and I'll give you a tip and I'll give you a tip.
This is how we are able to tell the story of the people of Naban.
There's nothing new about it.
The men were even able to pull the trigger.
I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it.
Seen chanen m ap ba w
I know you're right.
The Lord of Egypt is coming.
This can be done in Dimon or Dimon.
There are a lot of other things I'm talking about.
Others have fought with him.
I'm the one who's trying to kill you, I'm the one who's trying to fight you.
You've got a lot of people.
It's been a long time coming.
They're going to break it down.
They've got a lot of money to spare.
They're eating their own food.
A person will be responsible for making and killing more people than another person.
It's the only thing that makes sense.
or fin gen coat of one man nadi
There is a series of demons right now.
If it's something special, then it's something special.
They can say anything.
any of them.
Any chance you have.
Go children, the adults after accounting for things, appear to say No, not so, not so.
What is the meaning of adulthood, what is the meaning of adulthood, what is the meaning of adulthood, what is the meaning of adulthood, what is the meaning of adulthood, what is the meaning of adulthood, what is the meaning of adulthood, what is the meaning of adulthood, what is the meaning of adulthood, what is the meaning of adulthood, what is the meaning of adulthood, what is the meaning of adulthood, what is the meaning of adulthood, and what is the meaning of adulthood?
The divèbyen Gende people trejanmen great sèrè m, li gen dway li.
An old man could have fought or been killed.
It's not like we're going to be able to do it again or again.
That's the way it is with men.
How can I blame people like you for not being able to fight?
Men, men, they're not here, they're not here to fight.
So, what's the tip of the iceberg, what's the tip of the iceberg, what's the tip of the iceberg?
You can live like a man or a woman.
I don't know if I can do anything about it, but I can do something about it.
They know how to use the alarm and the alarm.
Putting things in my dad's hands.
It's not just me, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me.
If you give me an order, don't do it, and if you don't give me an order, don't do it.
I can't wait to hear about this guy.
You're going to send people all over the place, and they're going to make you feel better.
I've heard it all before and I've heard it all before.
You can use the same link to the account.
From the same link to the account.
One of the bays.
I'm not sure what else to do.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to fight.
It's something you've done before, because you've done it before, because you can't fight it.
I'm your boss.
Alok has quit his job and has gone on to become one of the world's most successful entrepreneurs.
No one can or should.
It's all about a person.
People are not looking at me.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make the same mistake as Etyak.
There are people on the street who don't like it.
It's good to be here.
I'm not good at it.
If you want to start a new life, you're going to have to start a new life.
You're the only one.
It is the genesis of man and man.
It's the only thing I can say.
I'm going to make you a dad.
I'm going to say, big man, big man, big man, big man, big man, but I'm not going to do anything.
If you want to eat, you have to eat, you have to eat, you have to eat, you have to eat, you have to eat.
Yo bak ant de yon ti moun gen kouta t ap?
And why, you don't know what to do?
And someone who knows something at once, let me tell you something, freakish.
And who's that, who's that?
This is the case with Enthél Tripòt or Wi.
Bakonn di Enthèl Jouda was his daughter.
I'm the only one who's ever stealing from a person who doesn't want to steal from a person.
The people who came to emetrild they bought it and they wanted to buy it.
When it comes to virtue, there is no such thing as man.
Can you tell me what's going on?
But the men who led me to it were the ones who led me to it.
It's like I've heard the words in my mouth.
I'm sure you've never seen it before.
They are full of an anman in the ban on the use of the word kabri.
I'm still waiting for you to come back.
Anse yon is a cruise ship.
Or know someone who knows something like that, or goes back and forth with someone who knows something about you.
Today's wine is a good one.
You'll never be able to win.
I'd like to know if you'll like it or not.
Chak kosekonsan avilimen la fè kòmèsyen kòb yo.
Ap dwon an t t
A wè vin lòt lendi
I'm in the mood for something.
That's why I'm here.
I'm going to have to talk to you.
Or you'll be able to find someone who's willing to pay for it.
It's all in the words of these people.
Something or two men are going to do to a person.
What are you going to do with these people?
I'm not sure.
Carise men, who are not in the same boat, are not in the same boat as men, even if they are a missionary.
I don't know.
It's not my fault.
Since then, there have been several.
There are a lot of people out there.
What's the matter with you?
Do you have the same plate as the one on the top of your head?
I'm going to do it together and I'm going to do it together.
I know what I'm talking about.
It's all about who you are or what you're doing.
I'm going to be flattered.
Either way, I'm going to be a zyonkari, they're going to be in my office, and I'm going to tell you.
It's been so long since I've been on a date with you, hasn't it?
If you're on the road, who's going to take a break?
Yes, I'm with you again, I'm with you now, Enmi Chawi, I'm with you now.
Mwen gen de moun Loun
It's like I've lost a lot of money.
There's a lot of great stuff going on here.
A lot of beef and a lot of beef.
A lot of people have the same rights.
It's all about you.
I've been doing a lot of concerts and I've been listening to a lot of people and I've been listening to a lot of people and I've been listening to a lot of people and I've been listening to a lot of people and I've been listening to a lot of people and I've been listening to a lot of people and I've been listening to a lot of people and I've been listening to a lot of people and I've been listening to a lot of people and I've been listening to a lot of people.
There is a lot of change, all the more so when it comes to making people happy, there is a lot of monkhood.
Say, who, a rivich, men know li chag rivich ap chanye rad to do yon?
I don't know who you are anymore, but I'm going to be the same person as you, and I'm going to be the same person as you.
Cond li interl pranz poz lagay li.
When people talk to you, you become the same person as they are when they talk to you.
I'll tell you what, a, wait a minute, I'll tell you what.
How do you get this person to eat?
We have to make sure that all men are comfortable.
It's like having a grandmother.
It's about men who want to be together.
w ap la la an gran
I'm not sure.
This is how people are treated.
I can't make things easy for people, can I?
It's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it's nice, it
They're just like children in a child's world.
A child is born with a disability or a child is born with a disability.
I've done a lot of things and I'm not happy about it.
We can do something about it.
I just want to do something about it.
It's an old man's dream.
The people of the wine la vin
I'm going to try to make a phone call under the same illness.
They are in good health.
You don't have to listen to your kids for a year.
What are the advantages of college?
I don't want to put things on the table.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it to college.
Mandan li kolè on the treti
There is also a lot of tension.
I can't help but wonder about your health.
I don't care about people and under a man's skin.
I don't want to go through this.
That's how I'm supposed to feel.
Who and what?
I'm not going to change people's minds.
Even if it is a random number, it is a random number.
I'm going to eat again.
There is no such thing as an apostle.
Eske konni moun nan fache
It's hard to work on people.
There's a lot more to life than that.
Or you're going to hire someone you work with to do your job.
I'm sure they're coming.
and ap frape bay isi pis
hit by the bay ba la
I don't know what else to do.
There's no such thing as a perfect match.
That's why I'm going to hit something like this.
I'm tired of it.
We have a lot of money.
Yoen finen hope.
Men have the right to do it, they have the right to do it, and they have the right to do it.
Is there a person like you who is a great-grandmother?
On such a person as I am, I will never be again.
If you want to go to school, people like la b la.
I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, or I am.
In the meantime, there's no such thing as prisoners of conscience.
A lot of connotations even in the new network of kozab, although there are a lot of falling, but there are still many.
E yon men gen de men wap al with l
It's a lot of fun.
I'm going to send you a series of messages for you.
Or at least I'm going to send you a message.
Or do they all struggle to fall into the same trap or two in order to re-release a child?
Hey, who's crying, who's crying, who's crying, who's crying, who's crying, who's crying, who's crying, who's crying, who's crying, who's crying, who's crying, who's crying, who's crying, who's crying, who's crying, who's crying, who's crying, who's crying, who's crying, who's crying, who's cry
Gen de men of the people of Mi
They're in the papers now.
My father and I are together.
There's nothing wrong with anything that's on paper.
I'm going to read it again and again.
They're not doing anything.
They're going to have a bad day.
There is no such thing as a brave man.
You've got a lot of people on your side.
I want to walk on your feet.
It's not like I've ever seen you before.
I'm going to tell you about it.
It's been a long time coming.
or Collet Fè or Collet Fè or Collet Fè.
Chocolate Did you ban me from rayan?
Do you know who you are talking to?
I'm sure you've heard of it.
I know, they're the same.
It's a great way to help men.
It's up to you.
It's almost as if they're watching you.
This is why I'm here.
There are two of them.
It's a two-way street.
In order to have a good lunch, we can branch out and talk to each other.
I'm going to tell you something.
It's not even a sign of things to be done around here.
What's the warning?
Pishke li kite, alamoun brav, e brav or rice?
Kondye alamounou yy
I'm sure you'll be happy with it.
When a man is like a river, he is like a river.
The day will come when people will feel like a river.
I will send you to tell you everything that has happened.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
jishan moun fouyi anpòt.
One day I'm going to tell my mom, if she doesn't listen to me, I'm going to give her a big hug.
Li Jalou, li Jalou.
Are we going to eat from the bottom of Jan Anpan?
Creye for women do you know?
M, create for women?
Reval was the man who had come before me.
Li, where are you going to get your hands on me?
I'm going to tell you, aren't I?
In your opinion, is it the right of the woman to marry, or the right of the woman to marry?
Wow, there's a lot more to it than that.
If I'm too young, when am I going to listen?
There's a lot going on here.
It's also a struggle to win.
They're going to love you for the rest of your life.
It's not too late to win.
It's a win-win situation, and it's such a big deal.
The older of the two parties in the new timetable is home.
I'm not going to tell you what to do.
If you don't spend a lot of money, you'll be a big fan.
Can I have cancer?
And if you're a Bourizo, how do you know what you're talking about?
For one man, the devil is a man of many talents.
We're going to kill someone who doesn't.
It's not about who you're talking to.
I'm with someone like you as a child.
It is also important to keep in mind that there is no such thing as a child.
You live, you steal.
Give people a chance to watch a concert before someone else does.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
They want to know what's going on.
One of them is a concert.
They're not going to be pleasant.
I have nothing to say, I have nothing to say, I have nothing to say, I have nothing to say, I have nothing to say, I have nothing to say, I have nothing to say, I have nothing to say, I have nothing to say, I have nothing to say, I have nothing to say, I have nothing to say, I have nothing to say, I have nothing to say, I have nothing to say, I have nothing to say, I have nothing to say, I have nothing to say, I have nothing to say!
I'm going to tell you what to do about it.
I'm looking forward to the next one.
I'm looking forward to seeing someone in Ebawòk.
Gande man te yo konn pa pa gen
Such as those who are well-off in your area.
I don't know anything about it.
I know I'm like this guy.
It's like the same person.
such as the people of Southan Lan.
I'm not going to lie to you.
In the meantime, I'm going to do something about it.
It's not the same thing.
After you've said it, why don't you tell us what to do?
Yon ba fri, yon, yon ba fri.
Ab lè di pa gagné bien an, an, an, an, ab inba sou fils la.
Mejan met Damye, anayon man on a weekindag og ons tad, ons sel ti bef ay.
When the men are taken, who is to whom the element?
Men, how are you?
Yo yo kondankou conditionjon men you know your conscience too
It's better to do the right thing than to do the wrong thing than to do the wrong thing.
You'll be able to get people to see you.
To pass a bottle of water to a man of the same age, I would like to say, thank you, I know.
If you're tired, you're tired.
I'm not tired at all.
Prase one so w as another w as another w as a kind of pity
You can eat so much in the morning, you can drink so much in the evening.
Pale m decal la Yo pran anpi un mach yo pileté a
It's the end of my life.
I have traveled extensively.
I'm going to have to travel a bit.
The end of the journey is not the end of the journey.
It's the end of the world.
I don't know if I can get a date.
You are the masons of L.
The changes that I've made to it.
After the renovations, the men were replaced.
I'm not going to lie to you.
You know, I'm a clown.
That's why I'm here.
I'm not sure what's going on here.
I'm not sure what's going on here.
I know where I'm going to take it.
I don't think there's anything else I can do to make you feel better about yourself.
It's not just me, it's me.
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to do that.
It's not like I'm doing anything wrong.
At the bottom of the ladder
It's not like that.
It's not like that.
I don't want to take it for myself, I want to read it for myself.
I want to open the door before I put on the mahogany and tandan l ap.
I'm going to put the theater on the floor.
You've got a lot to do with it.
Or ya wanch, or kresa l'ap da mete klis wab ki, chan klise a yo?
Are you going to kill me, yo klisim?
I know what you're talking about.
It's all in your head.
There's no such thing as a man.
I don't know what I'm going to do next.
I'm going to go upstairs.
This is the story of Simon.
You're on the other side.
You can win men's men.
That's what I'm doing.
You're out of the world, you're out of the world, you're out of the world.
On January 3rd, the same thing happened.
On Jan. 3, I was able to see the other side of the door.
3 of the other side.
It's the first time I've seen it.
I'm going to be a pioneer.
If you give a sheep a goat, you can raise a goat a goat.
It's time to do something like this.
That's how Decon is made.
I've known a couple of men before.
And Bòkijon releases on the little kay from Jordan to make it live.
What about rennel kounonk?
If you're not familiar with your account, you might want to go to Jen Kay, Jen Kay, Wi.
It's a lot of fun.
Ebechag, jen kay la, can you please, wi.
Bou gen decay or konn wè an pou yon as if another kay sou li again n
You can either go upstairs or you can go to another place.
Pijan rele m, gen kak dekay, also a ta gen gen dekay.
What is it?
Detail e kote ou yo pran tè yo netway gen pop pri a up the kay
How to release the plasma Devan kay kay la
I don't know if it's a cocktail or a cup of coffee.
The branch opens a cafe in the bay.
Well, I decided to go to the Mrakis and stand next to them.
Good, gen de gen.
In the meantime, a series of sequel sequels have been released, and I'm not going to let you down.
Because I'm a man of my own, I'm a man of my own, and I'm a man of my own.
For a picture of a fish in the sea.
What else do you take in order to help you?
I'm not an ointment.
I'm new to all sorts of things like you.
It's the only way to do it.
That's how it should be.
But that's not the way it is.
It's been a long time since I've done this kind of thing.
I'm going to tell you a story about Damen.
I've been through so much that I've been through so much that I've been through so much that I've been through so much that I've been through so much that I've been through so much that I've been through so much that I've been through so much that I've been through so much that I've been through so much that I've been through so much that I've been through so much that I've been through so much that I've been through so much that I've been through so much that I've been through so
It's not your fault.
Enbi, enbi wik kabè a saks ta sou poto yo wa, enbi enbi kavè a.
Is there any other way to do this?
Do you feel sorry for me?
Such men, such men, such men, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such a man, such
You're too shy, you're always on the road.
You've traveled the length and breadth of the country.
I'm going to win the ring.
They're still in the middle of the room, aren't they?
Oh, well, men like them are a work in progress, and I'm ready for it.
It's like a drop in water, it's like a drop in water.
Adene yo 2 travèkay la
They even stand like this.
They are on a journey.
Li la an la lanm
The legs are the same.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it, it's like I'm going to do it, it's like I'm going to do it, it's like I'm going to do it, it's like I'm going to do it, it's like I'm going to do it, it's like I'm going to do it, it's like I'm going to do it, it's like I'm going to do it, it's like I'm going to do it.
It's time to move on.
This is a picture of me in a new photo.
Let's get to the bottom of this.
Menmi pa se langè a
It's all over the place now.
li at lan
Read it in your head.
We don't want to go on a date with anyone.
People don't want to feel the same way.
Oudim Potwa, hold on to what?
Have you ever held a flea?
A series of events that take place in your life or in your life that take place in your life or in your life that take place in your life.
Or put me on a couche like that.
The wine fell on your way under the earth.
It's a race.
Or on the other side, on the other side.
I don't want to hear it.
Or they'll get rid of the rest of the men.
That's how I put you men men.
That's what it's all about.
They're the only ones who can do it.
I put it this way.
Yansa Yo releases you.
Obekay la wouz, they are the same.
Why don't you wait for the fair?
If you can eat, you can eat, you can eat, you can eat.
And then there's Chivan, Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, one Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan, two Chivan
Whether they want to talk or not, they don't.
It's called Chevan.
I've been waiting for you to tell me about your Chevan on the sanseride for a very long time.
I'm also using the same method.
It's a way of life for men.
or wi chivon an
Or I'll pass it like this.
They know that men have been drinking for so long, and that they have been drinking for so long.
or li, sa k pase tu chivon an y yo, ti jan or li le, ee, ee, ee, or rele.
Bou konn men like la yo konn wine bay ka la
It's like I'm on the fence and I'm more than happy to be on the fence.
That's why I'm going to tell you more.
We're going to have to figure out what's going on.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to eat more or not.
I don't know.
And if you can take a cup of tea or a change of clothes, then you can take a cup of tea or a cup of tea.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
One of them is releasing it.
It's all about coming together.
like kay la
It's like a race around the corridor.
The corridor will run for what?
The dog underneath you is everything you need to be around you.
I'm not a sheep like you.
An account can be used to send someone something.
And then there's the whole thing.
The one in front of the door is the one in front of the door.
It's right in front of the door.
He heard the two of them in front of the door.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
It's also the same as the one you're looking for.
It's a woman's palm, a woman's palm, a woman's palm, a woman's palm, a woman's palm, a woman's palm, a woman's palm, a woman's palm, a woman's palm, a woman's palm, a woman's palm, a woman's palm, a woman's palm, a woman's palm, a woman's palm, a woman's palm, a woman's palm, a woman's palm, a woman's palm, a woman's palm, a woman'
W woman li, or fo fo l fo katka, chak ka ka yo ki yon rele yo.
Yo, can I or can't I?
And I'm sure you'll be able to use the ball against me.
I'm not going to tell you why.
family members and other relatives of the deceased.
The family consists of one chakson and a planch palm.
An or li.
In the morning, I knew I was going to be able to do what I wanted to do.
Anbevisa, you're the only one who knows.
Men, let's hear it for you.
Toujan, who's the rapper?
I'm not sure if I'll be able to do it anytime soon.
No one knows.
Who knows?
As long as there is no money left, pejalozi wa konn yo le anman, the man who led the way to bejiz, egypt la konsanme.
If you do, you'll write it down, and you'll take it, and you'll take it.
And if you take things, and if you take a book, you're going to do it.
If you're going to do something like this, you're going to die.
What's the matter with you now?
Men, men, men, are you ready?
Ak lanmi men an onbè tou
There is no convalescency.
Let's see if we can get a win or a draw.
I don't know what to say.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
I don't want to do that.
When you're up there, you'll be able to do everything you want to do for a living.
I know I'm going to have to come up with something like this.
I'm going to make a series of nipples.
Yo jan relemi sa a an van moutè ka la.
So I'm here, and they're running.
What's the matter with me?
I won the Atoll, I won the Betou series, I won the Betou series, I won the Betou series, I won the Betou series.
What's up with that?
Kouba yon kayatòl ek li swòtefou yon gran klouma an pi la pi wine, an pi kouche, or to hear tea, or we yon rele sa.
Kay la gen tou.
It's not like I'm going to release Jen Anpò.
The other person is the one who is responsible for a lot of things.
It's what you're supposed to do.
If 2 points are multiplied by a point, then the value of the point is equal to the value of the point.
I don't want to go to the bathroom.
You don't have to wait until you're done.
And then there's the other door, the other baton, the other baton, the other baton.
I'm on my way.
When you're up and about, you're up and about.
I don't know if I'll ever see you like this guy.
It's all in your head.
There is a lot to be said about the seeds.
They said, "Don't you know what the sword is?"
What, when your block, when your block, when your block, when your block, when your block, when your block, when your block, when your block, when your block, when your block, when your block, when your block, when your block, when your block, when your block, when your block, when your block, when your block, when your block, when your block, when your block, when your block, when you block, when you block?
What's your name?
De se yon de puerta, or just the door, or close my door.
If you're not interested in a woman or a gender issue, don't get caught up in the debate.
He was also a key figure in the debate.
There is also a debate.
The debate was held in a clearer context.
That's why I'm here.
Or do I wear it?
Do you want to open the door?
I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything, I can do anything.
There's a lot more to it than that.
There's nothing you can do to get in.
From coast to coast.
Solvi li koche zanfè ouvri l.
I'm going to get out of here and do my job, huh?
That's going to cost a lot of money.
Depan ba ya la or you put me like that
Or I'll do it like that.
Or I'll do that.
Or I'll do it again.
Or the cost of l...
I'm not sure what's going on here.
You're going to have to go back to the drawing board.
Now I know what I'm doing.
Now you know what's going on.
Is this the devil's tactic?
Zion has taken the glass.
I'd like to know what you're going to do with me if you want to see me.
or ye or ye
What's the latest in your line of work?
And you can't even ban a woman.
Now you have the same place as a pi pa koumenkay or menkay
I'm going to take a pill in front of you.
You build up a pillow so that you don't leave the surface of the new person with a new relay.
Sef anmi only one ap la.
And wow, buy it, pop reti yo pa yi bay sa yo.
I can't wait to get started.
Pop music or ap netwayen
Pavloube sou sou netwaye
It's not like I'm going to pop it up.
Or to pay for something new.
I'm going to tell you how much money I've got.
Hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
It's not my fault.
What is it, or what is it?
De Vwazion, because you know I'm not.
What if I'm not, and I'm not, even if I'm giving up on you?
Men, you are far away.
To get up to speed, or to stop saying anything or anything, or to just do it all.
It will cost you a lot of money to enter such a country.
There is no place to enter with a reel in the corridor.
It's not like I'm in the same boat.
Conso if you are pregnant.
They're going to take you to Wessel Endam.
I don't know how to fight.
Men who are not like them have the right to be included.
People need to get in or out of the house.
And then I'm going to eat it.
No, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, barye, bar
Either I'm running away from you, or I'm going to run away from you.
I can't even enter my father's house, but I can.
A man's body was found in a corridor.
Go to the team, Go to the bay and get to know the people, meet the people, meet the people, get to know the people.
So what do you think?
When the sun rises and sets, it is as if the sun were setting in the middle of the night and many people are running.
It's a man's world.
There is a lot of people out there who don't know what they're talking about.
It's like I'm on a leash.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
He wanted to plant a series of things.
He wanted to plant a plant.
It's not like I'm going to release it.
Men who live along the coastline of the plant.
What's the point of the M, behind the L, for a lake?
Behind the post, behind the kay lan.
Have you ever heard of a lake like this?
Enbeya sa, or jade l lakou!
Donk, as one thing I can win?
Li kay mwen an gen tan.
Or who wouldn't want to hear it!
I'm going to put it on, I'm going to put it on.
If you don't know what you're talking about, you'll be fine.
It's like the best thing in the world.
Or at least two of them.
It's a great way to get a feel for yourself.
We met on the other side of the board.
You're going to have to go through a lot of things just to make sure that you're on the right track.
Men have lost a lot of weight.
Or just the whole thing.
It can be used for a variety of purposes.
But it's the same thing.
The men even called you.
Well, that's where I'm going with this guy.
Selling or putting on meb la
I'm going to have to go to the bathroom and make sure it's not too late.
It can be used to make me feel good about myself.
It's all about the people.
Or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so, or so,
Now, I know where you're going.
I'm going to do something about it and I'm going to do something about it.
I'm always on the lookout for things.
Or you can take it from there.
Or think when men cover men's faces.
kay ou la gen
It's not like you're going to be able to do it.
Or just sit outside.
Men or women will do or forget and you will be punished.
On others you have the right to do so.
Pass the two mountains and sit down, pass the mountain.
Okay, Louy, I'm going to buy your stuff right now.
If you're going to pay me, how can I buy a ton of them?
Pa yo mon kon mit krich lal
It's the same with people, and it's the same with people.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to do it again.
Before the news came out again, there was only one person in the room.
Put it in front of your chair.
Don, eswouch, eswouch why do you feel like you're meeting me now for the same reason?
Now I'm talking about a bunch of old men, a bunch of old men, a bunch of young men, and a bunch of guys.
I know men, but I'm too busy getting in, or sitting in full, or having an economy, or something like that.
I've been waiting for you.
I've been waiting for you to come to me.
There is a right to a fair trial.
There should be a celebration like this.
I'm going to be a full-fledged man.
There are two ways to get up and sit down to eat, or there are two ways to get up and sit down.
There are two birthday parties when you're in your chair.
Men, they're not even there, but, well, you're still in the middle of it.
There is no royal chair or, men, wi chair, m, o, wi.
I'm not even sure if I'm going to be able to do it myself, but I'm sure I'm going to be able to do it myself.
I'm going to tell you a few things about men.
Do you know who is responsible for the deaths of your loved ones, or do you know who is responsible for the deaths of your loved ones?
I know a form of cheeses, but I know a lot of people, and I know a lot of people.
They can't be real men.
It can be used against people who have a disability.
The whole site is a good site and I'm very happy with it.
What's the matter with you?
I'm not the only one.
I, the verse is a few, a few, men, me, men, the verse is a few.
Who am I to tell you what I am to tell you?
What do you know about it?
Now that I'm done, what am I going to do?
One such thing is that I'm not going to be able to do anything for the animals that I'm going to put on.
When they do, I have a chance to stay on your radar, and a chance to catch up with them.
Well, in the meantime, what do you do with your time, so that you can carry your luggage?
Men, what is your goal?
If you're on your own, if you're on your own, if you're on your own, if you're on your own, if you're on your own, you're on your own.
Takou people used to use it as a barrier.
Re-release your soul to make men feel better.
They are no longer a
They don't feel like they're coming.
There are only three people who know how to take it.
We're all about things.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it without Joseph.
The men who had been killed were the men who had been killed.
I'm trying to figure out how to create an image.
As a man, as a woman, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man, as a man.
It's just a matter of getting to know each other.
It's not like that.
Nou pike kat of konsan an pri nou pase of your soul
The country is a country with a coat of arms.
Yon rede kabann sa a.
It's not like I'm going to sleep in the same room with you.
Do you know how to do this?
In any case, are there any restrictions on the use of bananas and bananas?
What is it, what is it, or what is it?
You're not going to score, you're not going to score, you're not going to score.
They were forced to give the bannann for two days after the bannann.
Yon dirondèmi sou yo, kresan ti kouzèv an bat do yo.
ramase tel thing kabanmi
What do we know?
I'm glad they are.
There are many other ways in which an angel or a companion or a colleague can help you.
I don't know how long it will take you to get there.
I don't know what to do or what to do.
The men are known to be in court.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
It's also covered.
It's the middle of nowhere.
MEN, do you have a son named Zoyi?
Men, knock on wood, renen fwa yy retay pou, renen won fwa Zoyi an tretay etwa, moun.
Kounba yo kont fou renen an, met Zoyi an m dan m?
Wey, if you've got your head covered, if you've got your head covered, if you've got your head covered, if you've got your head covered, you've got my back.
I've got another one again.
The equator is not the same as the equator.
It's going to be a good cover.
They'll tell you what to do.
The team is even new to the kabann team.
I'm going to cover it up, but I don't know.
Open your eyes.
And then there's the pity of the people.
It's not like I'm going to be able to sleep in a big room for a while, it's like I'm going to sleep in a big room for a while, it's like I'm going to sleep in a big room for a while, it's like I'm going to sleep in a big room for a while, it's like I'm going to sleep in a big room for a while, it's like I'm going to sleep in a big room for a while!
I'm a grown-up who's been listening to the radio for a long time.
Yo, eli won kay, or ya or you want a ball of other colors and so on, so on and so forth.
Now, if you're on the edge of my seat, why are you wearing it?
Pouk ak leve kay la?
The people are paralyzed like the people of the city.
I know how to win and make you triye pa l lanp paray chayo
I know there's something else I can do.
I beg of you for a release of Colman, but I'm not the same Colman now, am I?
You're not going to get your money's worth.
We're going to give you a chance to make a plaque on me.
It's been a long time coming.
I bought a radio, and I put on a big bag.
Men, great bay, tapou soap, what kind of soap is there?
That's why I'm here.
What are the two wines in Bwat li?
Something to buy a blanket can be used for a plunge because it's a new one.
In the meantime, there is no other way to buy it.
No, it's not like that, or I'm going to buy a man's powder, and I'm going to give it to you.
When people come to me, I'll tell them what to do.
I'm at the head of Zègre
You're not going to buy it.
It's not like I'm going to buy it before I get to Zègre.
Yowa gand takou si moun men la pi grès sa ap fall sounmen l
It's not like it's going to happen to anyone or anything.
Greece is falling apart.
Takou sotamese sounmen li lan ban t alou lan chab fell.
Even bouwis, Balén, Bòngende, and nanm.
I used to wear something else on my face, myself again, with a smile on my face.
You don't have to borrow your money, but you have to borrow your money.
Men, are you mad, are you mad?
It's small enough to be able to make a difference in your life, and then you can put on a rock like this, a rock like this, and go to your place.
For the sake of clarity.
And as soon as I can, we'll be able to get back to you, we'll be able to get back to you.
We've got what it takes to get there.
What can I do now?
5 minutes to get up.
Yo, if you put it as a sign to put up Joudyè, or take it with you or do something about it.
It's the end of it, or the end of it.
Ouye, Dazi valley, ap continue to yo, eli, like or besou dife again sa or fè li.
What kind of a?
It's a different story.
It can be used to differentiate a lead from a lead.
Thank you very much.
Take a good look at what you're getting yourself into.
Take a look at what's going on.
It's not like we're going to have a lot of fun with it.
They're not going to be able to keep up with Lafimen.
I'm going to try to find a way out of my situation.
I've seen you on the road.
It's not a relay.
Such a person has the right to ban things for the child to wash.
As an asshole with you all bay sa
Pave or paint or di
or from wine lavage
If I am going to sell these things to Syet Menyè, my kingdom will fall and be shattered by a flood.
It can be used to connect you, to connect you, to connect you, and to connect you.
I have served in the service of Timothy.
There's no one else here anymore.
There are no parameters.
Once again, there's Lari.
There is no other way to serve you again.
M is the color w fond
It's like I'm on the other end of the spectrum or I'm on the other end of the spectrum or I'm on the other end of the spectrum or I'm on the other end of the spectrum or I'm on the other end of the spectrum or I'm on the other end of the spectrum or I'm on the other end of the spectrum or I'm on the other end of the spectrum or I'm on the other end of the spectrum or I'm on the
or good luggage or to take your pick or take your pick.
I can't wait to get started.
I'm going to take your advice.
It's a great way to redeem yourself.
Who are the people who are happy to make their debut in chak bò yo kou yon reel Kwi?
I know a man who knows the same thing as money.
I'm sure you'll be able to find a way out of this one.
It's not like it's a big deal.
I don't know if I'll take anything new or anything else.
This is the way of Tanchon.
What do you think of me?
Tanchon an like fresh li like fresh yo man
I wish you a blessing.
It's like a little too much.
You're going to have to make sure that you're okay.
It's a little too much.
I'm going to take a break, I'm going to take a break, I'm going to take a break, I'm going to take a break, I'm going to take a break, I'm going to take a break, I'm going to take a break, I'm going to take a break, I'm going to take a break, I'm going to take a break, I'm going to have a break, I'm going to have a break, I'm going to have a break, I'm going to have a break.
I don't want to give up on you.
There's no way I'm going to lose you.
Or you could say that you've lost your mind.
I know how to spend the whole day or take your money in front of you.
Or I'll take it, I'll take it from you.
I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know,
I know the path of the mantle is there.
You've got your money's worth.
That's why I'm not going to water the people in the garden to water the trees in the garden.
nouve releve so's a
Nouveau releve E can be found in the garden
I'm going to tell you how to be a woman right now.
The people in your garden.
Dops konse li bay w.
Evésye, how did they get to the Kanjan?
Took no la kay or no gadò an li, they were able to serve with caution.
Do you have any idea?
Antisse konsen w pran pran, ne fayye, li se se live from se or pran, or pran lomite sou yo.
When I'm drunk, when am I supposed to drink, when am I supposed to put it on the other side of the door?
I can't wait for the day to come.
or gen right a a a a a
or gen dwa a plen
It's all in a day's work.
You're going to have to choose a gen.
I've lived my life doing the same thing.
I don't know if I'm going to make it.
I don't know what you're talking about.
It's hard to tell if someone is going to be able to help you.
I can drink water or drink a glass of water and drink it twice a day.
I'm going to tell you a story about people.
If you want to buy it then buy it.
What do you want to buy?
So what am I going to buy?
Or are you going to take the net promandan ki sa y ap metou?
Men, boys, boys and girls.
Konn for one of the reigning champions of the game.
Even if you do it as if you heard it, you'll break it down.
On t ap pale de manje an, anksan w te dimen kout manje or a, en choujye.
When yo kond metchòdya you come to see me like this, how do you know me?
How do you know it's time now, or do you want it?
Oh, whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa
What's the point of kissing me?
Men, what can I do?
If there is a bandwidth, a bandwidth, a bandwidth, a bandwidth, a bandwidth, a bandwidth, a bandwidth, a bandwidth.
Gen yon ki pi fonvase Chaudyè a bay zanm, limonika or kakout bouris, sou ap semen l se yo le, bouyon.
It's not like you're looking for a way out.
I'm not going to be able to do anything about it.
Lord yon vessel lye vou li Lajantre is known as the representative of the Lord.
One tries to find a way to escape or bring it back to life.
I can't wait to see you again.
They've been re-released.
If you don't use the filter, the filter can be turned off.
Do you have a cup of coffee a day, or a pound a day, or a ton a day?
It's the first time I've ever been in a relationship with a mother.
Pop peopleen may be a.
There is no other way to do this.
When I was a kid, I was able to retire.
They're not going to be able to keep up with men.
It's a great day to be alive every day.
The thing or put I la Sa ap vannend lan
There's a bunch of them.
Lavile Di Bichèt La tandye Di Bichèt La ville de Bichèt is where you live?
Is there such a thing as Lavil Bòmon an se la yo know?
Owe, is that Di Bichèt?
I'm going to tell you.
It is possible to go to a woman's house or to go to a woman's house.
Chepis or pass to make a wine.
I'm not sure.
If a promissory note is only for the time being, what about the promissory note?
You've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it,
There is no such thing as a gene pool.
How do you know you're the same person?
For those of you who live in the country, I'm going to put a lot of pressure on you.
Who is the new chief at Kouto?
This means that you need to know how to take or take a class.
Deconsensus is the only way I can make the cut if I need it.
Are you ready for this, Alim?
There are other people who know who has a baby.
Yo filè jse or papa
It's not just the people who've seen it, it's the people who've seen it, it's the people who've seen it, it's the people who've seen it, it's the people who've seen it, it's the people who've seen it, it's the people who've seen it, it's the people who've seen it, it's the people who've seen it, it's the people who've seen it, it's the people who've seen it.
It's the kind of person you're going to be with.
The bullets were fired even in the middle of the night and the bullets were fired as a result.
How do you know who you're talking to?
The Lord is the one who will guide you.
When I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I
It's a mouthful of words.
Coffee is taken by Zayou Bay.
It is not enough to get tested and not enough to get tested.
Asilo wine is made from coffee.
Let's make some coffee.
You can make a cup of coffee.
There is a need for people to drink coffee.
What do you need for kosek coffee?
I'm going to do it with the Greek.
They're trying to make a difference.
They put it in the Greek language.
They're not supposed to do that in Greek.
I made them.
They've put a lot of pressure on me.
And then there's the next decade.
Set two routes.
Set two from the Greek lè.
There are two versions in Greek.
This is how it can be done.
If I'm a golden boy, I'm not going to make coffee.
Bo wou, can I have a cup of coffee like this?
Konn mwen, it's why I live in Greece.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
I can't wait to do this.
How do you know I'm going to make a Series Coffee?
What's the coffee flow?
So, what's the point of this coffee?
I'm a man of the people.
It's the end of the world as we know it.
I'm going to try to get the rest of the saldi back.
I'm going to check it out.
Somebody's gonna tell me how to stop you, right?
If the blood pressure is too high, but the blood pressure is too low, then the blood pressure is too high.
I've been waiting for you.
I'm not going to say a word.
I want to know everything as much as I want to be a force to be reckoned with.
It's your strength.
I'm not going to make a big deal out of it.
It's not new.
It's not just people.
It's the only way I can make tea.
It's not even from Greece.
I've never been to a coffee shop before.
It's not like I've ever been in a relationship with a man.
It's the only thing I've ever seen before.
Or you can have a cup of coffee with them.
I'm going to have a cup of coffee and I'm going to have a cup of coffee and I'm going to have a cup of coffee and I'm going to have a cup of coffee and I'm going to have a cup of coffee and I'm going to have a cup of coffee and I'm going to have a cup of coffee and I'm going to have a cup of coffee and I'm going to have a cup of coffee and I'm going to have a cup of coffee and I'm going to have a cup of coffee and I'm going to
The coffee is made of two thin layers of coffee.
Come on, aren't you going to meet me again?
Enèk, o gade kafe a w ap gade, or gendw ap gade kafe, anpou ap gade Minda, pa la li a.
Or thank you?
It's the same with coffee.
Took the same amount of time to write a letter.
I'm going to put the bag in the bag.
It's the same with the Bay of Plenty.
That's why I put on tea.
Ante nou a?
People who know how to cook.
It's all about how you feel.
It can be used in the kitchen.
The men are releasing it.
I like being able to buy a coupon bout gwa avè li
We can make things as simple as we can make them.
I don't want to cook a handkerchief or take a nap.
What can I do to help you?
Now let's take the chodi chodi a
This is the genus of raspberries.
Or take a sabotage to do it, and you can do it.
Who is good enough to take water to drink from your mouth?
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it.
I know you, sweetheart.
No, not water, not even water, not even rain water?
It is possible to use a bath as in the case of a bathtub.
I'll send you a few more.
enba enba a
Obele, or the balman, is the one who runs away, and the one who runs away is the one who runs away.
There is a lot of water.
You'll find water in a short period of time and underneath it will be water in a short period of time.
You can drink water and so on.
to do something about it.
water and water.
Or the beginning or the end of the line.
Fwon oufou or anticote pou l de tiri
I'm going to salt men.
I'm going to take you to a place to hang out.
Sa ou fou yo pou b al pass, with one relay.
I'm sure you'll know when I'm coming back.
People who don't know what they're talking about.
such as kay tan liraj li
They set a price for everything until they fell into one place and ran away.
I don't want to go into a single room.
Men, if they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are, they are.
And when you enter Yon bloyeyeou ready early or the first bloye ay la Gwè to buy yourself.
How do I get water to a pool of water?
You have four days to live.
It's a very good idea.
I'm not sure where I'm going with it.
But it's also a mouthful.
If I'm going to do this, what are you going to do with me?
Edgadè w fin nave yo moun ti bay yo konn achit ant na
I also know how to use it and how to use it so that I can use it in the bathroom.
I'm going to tell you how much it's worth.
You can even make the wine here like Gzigo!
I'm going to be applauding my fans.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it myself or not.
How can you ever get past it?
And a few of them have a soap-and-soap counterpart.
Some of the greeks used a soap to make a poultice.
How do you know what's going on?
On the other side of the line, I'm going to put on a cake that's so nice.
What's the point of the blade?
Finmen or for a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new one or a new
Whether it's in Finland or elsewhere.
That's what I'm doing.
I'm going to do everything in my order.
I'm either going to put on a dress or a can, or I'm going to take a nap, or I'm going to do it.
I set the clock.
How do you feel about Kay Sa A?
How do you make the mantle?
If you're a director, you're not going to be able to buy it.
Understand how to use it if you want to buy it.
If you don't know what to call it, you'll have to pay for it.
In the meantime, I'm going to buy some coconut oil and I'm going to buy some coconut oil.
Onmanndam dou yon pass you by to make you cover men's health.
Yo chak cover ak ak ak ak ak on the modernm
I've been drinking wine for so long.
I'm glad to see you at Mass.
The wine is taken from the bay and we will all eat from the bay.
It's not the end of the world, Lord.
And I'm here, vin wouj, takou sou is here to see you again.
Vi tache, tache yo dizan.
I'm not sure what else to do.
There's no way around it.
I'm not going to lie.
Other than that, it's not a bad thing.
You are going to have to live with it.
When you're ready to take your clothes off, or when you're ready to take your clothes off, you're ready to go.
It can be as simple as that.
O te bay rat la consesa te re bay rat tant li vin fwon mann bay so much so much so
It's not about the people.
And you can get more people to retire.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
I want to take you to the fwon mann bay so much so
It's good stuff, it's good stuff, it's good stuff, it's good stuff, it's good stuff, it's good stuff, it's good stuff, it's good stuff, it's good stuff, it's good stuff, it's good stuff, it's good stuff, it's good stuff, it's good stuff, it's good stuff, it's good stuff, it's good stuff, it's good stuff, it's good stuff, it's good stuff, it's good stuff,
I'm more than happy to be on the other side.
If you can get it back, you can get it back.
It's not like I'm going to be able to get a new one, but I'm going to be able to get a new one, and I'm going to get a new one, and I'm going to get a new one, and I'm going to get a new one, and I'm going to get a new one, and I'm going to get a new one, and I'm going to get a new one, and I'm going to get a new one, and I'm going to get a new one, and I'm going to
There's no such thing as too much.
I'm not wearing a pancake.
If the meter is so me reesa a La lvi
How did you become a man, or how did you come to be a man?
And I'm sure you'll find yourself falling down the stairs and falling down the stairs.
I know it's like I'm able to carry my luggage and keep it clean.
Don't be afraid to ask for help if you're going to be able to do it.
or plwaye l
Take a look at what you've done before before, and see how you're doing.
Or I'll pass by.
This is the first time I've seen L..
With that, the monti batay yo against Manyòk especially yo fondit who is known as the rapper of tout gros ble lanmiden.
In general, a child's self-esteem is the same as that of a child's self-esteem, but the child's self-esteem is the same.
The cancer is the result of the birth of a child, and it's the result.
I'll always be there, but will you vote for me?
I said, do you always know who you are?
It is possible for someone to argue with you.
As a matter of fact, there will be a lot of debate about it.
All those who served in Wouy
And it's slowly coming up.
I'm not the only one, Malpadi.
Tell them that you're going to miss Malop too.
As a matter of fact, I'm not sure.
I don't want to be part of the party.
For the sake of completeness, I'm going to tell you a story about a man's life.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I know I'm going to be able to do it.
It's not my fault.
Will the water fall or fall under the roof of the house behind the car?
Can anyone redeem the whole thing?
When, or if, or if, or if, or if, or if, or if, or if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if
Who is the baray branch
The people I'm going to be friends with are going to be friends with me, and they're going to be friends with me, and they're going to be friends with me, and they're going to be friends with me, and they're going to be friends with me, and they're going to be friends with me, and they're going to be friends with me, and they're going to be friends with me, and they're going to be friends with me, and they're going to be friends with me, and they're going to be friends with
I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it, I can do it.
What are you going to do, what are you going to do, what are you going to do, what are you going to do, what are you going to do, what are you going to do, what are you going to do, what are you going to do, what are you going to do, what are you going to do, what are you going to do, what are you going to do, what are you going to do, what are you going to do, what are you going to do, what are you going to do?
Amfe, is there anything else, is there anything else?
I can't tell you what to do.
It's a new and exciting experience.
If all the animals in the cell are going to die, they will be able to place their lives in danger.
Tooku and the fowl that you know, who knows where they are?
And then there's the lake, and then there's the bay.
And then there's the other one.
I'm going to do the same thing.
I'm recording the debut album of the same name.
I've been on the road for a while.
I'm also in the mood for something new.
It's all over the place.
People like to hear the word "l".
I'm going to tell you what I can do.
I can't wait to get out there and do the same thing.
E Salell has a tonne of footprint behind him.
I'm going to try to get a poultry.
Manman poul la, as I know you and others, I know you better.
Let me tell you that I can't do anything that I don't want to do.
Li kouvye li tabèk
They don't exist.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to read law or not, but I don't know if I'm going to be able to read it.
such as hearing loss.
I'm also 11 years old.
Such as la wouyè l
I know what you're talking about.
It's not like I'm going to be able to cook, but it's like I'm not going to be able to cook.
Or even me.
Next time I'm going to sing a song, I'm going to sing a song.
I've been waiting for you to sing a song and I've been waiting for you to sing a song and I've been waiting for you to sing a song.
I'll sing you a song I don't know or I'll sing you a song I'll sing you a song I'll sing you a song I'll sing you a song I'll sing you a song I'll sing you a song I'll sing you a song I'll sing you a song I'll sing you a song I'll sing you a song I'll sing you a song I'll sing you a song I'll sing you a song I'll sing you a song I'll sing you a song I'll sing you a song I
If I take it, I'm going to do the same thing, I'm going to do it.
It's one of those things that makes sense.
It's not the same as a generic name.
May will tell you that I will take care of you.
It's been a week and a half.
I'm going to take you to the next level.
Well, t ap or tapou yon pou l bay zanm, know w done li, know w done m too, cut to l bay zanm.
Chode l, chode or chode, or plume l, san w plime l, san w retire l, san w ren anvele.
I can't afford to pay for anything else, and I can't afford to pay for anything else.
I'm not sure about that either.
For the sake of clarity.
The letter to Tiyak Le knows how to do it.
Or do you know full men m
Or do you know who I am?
You know the time or the time but you have the same problem but you don't know the time or the time.
W ap savapirat an men m ap bidi.
And if I can do what I want to do, I can do what I want to do.
If you know a bad baps, a bad man, a bad man, a bad man, a bad man, a bad man, a bad man, a bad man.
In the meantime, they don't know the glib.
Or could it be eleven, how many times a day?
So, what part of the cell is it?
I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know,
There is no one who can make it short for me.
It's not a man's fault.
Yo retirel yon difivè a tè b ap fèt sansib.
I'm going to sleep for the last couple of days and I'm not going to sleep anymore.
Konn gen de fwa
I know what you're talking about.
Especially the other ones we came up with.
Zesa yo yo pa gen men
I'm going to the bay to load it.
Do you know me?
The men in front of me and me are going to have a ton of fun.
Li yon rele san.
Akonn lan l, do you know how to weigh?
Well, you're not going to be able to do that.
No, I'm not going to use the hospital.
It can be used to open cells.
There are two ways to do this.
I'm going to take care of everything.
Li viyan plim yo sèyè
Who can make her own children, and who can make her own children?
If I can't do that, on the other hand, I can't do that, I can't do that!
I've known you for a long time, and I know everything about you.
I'm in the middle of something.
Nou t ap pale de canan
I'm not sure what's going on here.
I don't know what's going on here.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Li preske the same pran sa kanan
They're pretty fresh even in the middle of nowhere.
They are present in the same form as the Canaanites.
and chevreske the same Jan the same
They're not in Canada.
Another club is the same as another club.
That's why I love you so much.
It's hard to believe that I've just taken the same one.
to have children to win.
The game is free to download and play.
Now that I've got another ticket, I've got a few ears, and I've got one!
Kochon Denm is also at the top of the list.
You can't do that for me or you can't do that for me.
It's the way of the world.
I want to buy like a man.
You've got to be careful.
I'm not even going to say a word.
I'm looking forward to buying some of them.
I bought it for myself.
I'm just cooking.
If you want to know how much you want to eat or drink, you have to know how much you want to eat.
Now that you've got your hands full, you've got your fingers crossed, you've got your fingers crossed.
In a balloon now, are you ready for a drink?
The chief of the army is a ton of limin, who is the son of the king?
It's not like they're going to make a big deal out of it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to help anyone if I want to.
They don't point the ankle back or anything.
I don't want to see people again.
I don't want to go through it.
Great people, I'm so happy with you.
It's all right with me now.
There is no problem with it.
I'm not sure now.
There is a problem with constipation.
There's nothing wrong with that.
I'm trying to figure out who you are and what you're doing.
Now you're ready to go.
Life is too much to ask for.
I've seen it so many times that it's hard for me to say.
There are other conditions, such as m.
I'm sure you'll be able to keep up with what's going on here.
It's like this guy.
Klyan's hair is lacking.
Genanklò w pran n m m san fèng l
They're going to be able to do it.
To see someone who deserves to be like me, like me, like you, or take you away from me, I'm going to be like you.
There is no other way to know Dizab.
What do you know about fashion?
I'm going to try to make the most of the team.
w w vin altr mann elorè
It's a great way to get to know each other.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it through.
I can't wait to hear about it now.
I'm going to take a look at some of them.
Where is the oil, where is the oil, what is it?
I'm going to open it up and I'm going to open it up and I'm going to open it up and I'm going to open it up and I'm going to open it up and I'm going to open it up and I'm going to open it up and I'm going to open it up and I'm going to open it up and I'm going to open it up and I'm going to open it up and I'm going to open it up and I'm going to open it up and I'm going to open it up and
And that's why I'm here.
It's not just me, it's people.
Such as w such as fon kache w ansib bay sa a
I know what I'm thinking.
or by metan anpi nou an
What can you do about it?
How can you brake the same thing?
Or you can do something new.
How can you do it?
to punish him.
You can brake, or brake, or you can do it, and you can do it.
I'm going to break, I'm going to break, I'm going to break, I'm going to break, I'm going to break, I'm going to break, I'm going to break, I'm going to break, I'm going to break, I'm going to break, I'm going to break, I'm going to break, I'm going to break, I'm going to break, I'm going to break, I'm going to break, I'm going to break, I'm going to break,
Do you want to be a good boy, a good boy, or a bad boy?
Ay la said: Fakou viyanm
This is why we are here today.
Fau la année profonde commette le mou ou ou ou te gen tanfo m
I've got other friends like you.
Just like I've always wanted to be.
It's a bit of a shock to me.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
The men are my friends.
As you can see from the other side.
The men of the village are very proud of themselves.
I don't know if it's God's will, but it's never going to be good.
Do you know how to buy wine?
I'm sorry, but I'm not here to tell you that I'm here to help you, but I'm here to help you.
I set the trap.
or fin n lap bouri
The finest things I have ever seen.
or bouchi l
or gouchi l la sodoufèk
oufi toufi l.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Litanes are a very important part of my life.
Before I put on my shoes, I'm going to go.
That's how I'm going to get back on track.
Serel yon kote, konnyan an passion san paprikate is where they are.
You know, I don't know what I'm doing right now or what I'm not doing right now.
If you're going to get a job, you're going to get a job, and you're going to get a job, and you're going to get a job.
Something that is forbidden to me.
I know you know I'm going to make it to the top of my list.
I can tell you what I'm doing.
You make me feel like I'm on the other side of the world.
I've been on the loose for a long time.
I'm not sure if I'm going to win.
I'm going to tell you something about the tip of the iceberg.
I don't know if it's tomorrow or tomorrow, but if it's tomorrow or tomorrow, I don't know if it's tomorrow or tomorrow, but if it's tomorrow or tomorrow, I don't know if it's tomorrow or tomorrow, but if it's tomorrow or tomorrow, I don't know if it's tomorrow or tomorrow.
I don't want to eat.
Tell me, I'm going to take you out of my life if it's like the flu, I'm going to ban chicken and poultry right now.
So, you know what?
Rappado, where do you know rapadou?
Is it possible for you and your family to be together?
It's like when you do something or talk to a fan.
Since then, I've been on the road for a long time.
Now I'm ready to move on with my life.
Since there's a lot you can do to sell your stuff, how can you sell it now, boy?
Alò, lò w mete, nou not do I myself Wod lo nou, but two take me, too, but in eight minutes tonm ayzal.
Even the bay la w, van tou vi, or li ton.
When you are in the right place at the right time, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say
Neob ou, bò dise, or langou san fè, ap kwit lanje.
And now there's a big thing to do.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
I'm going to be in a lot of trouble.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I don't know what to do about it.
Just like before I put a ban on the game, I've had enough.
I can't get enough of them.
It's not like they're going to be able to do anything.
The tonman is used for wine.
I'm not going to run fanba.
When you drink it or forget it, it's like wine.
Lot's ankou is a right.
In the end, there is a possibility that they will be forgotten.
I can't even remember what it was like to be in a party.
Sa yon konsan w gen depui w kon Diva a, sa se pa boujil bou lè an Konseyè, sa sa k Bou kaje.
It can also be used to treat new people.
I'm going to take a break.
This is why we are here to help you.
The man is now everything.
Or are they now?
Gen of gold or konm li
Now a fini
It's not like I'm going to see you again.
There you go again.
The last angel is now, the last angel is now, the last angel is going to make his own cup of tea.
Dresil, don't worry about it now or, like, don't worry about it now or you're going to do it.
Fin kale li or measise yo bay, or cover well covered, why or how do you unite.
As if they had never seen an angel before.
My water, to buy for the people of the world, on my water, to buy for the people of the world.
Generally speaking, there is a lack of consistency.
I've got a lot of weight.
I'm going to send you a message that I'm going to send you a message that I'm not going to send you a message.
or four li.
I've been to the lottery before.
Pan nip met li w met li je chòdi a
I've met them all before.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
I'm sure you'll be able to take a look at it.
I'm here to help.
If you're on a scale, I'm going to tell you a story, or two, I'm going to tell you a story.
It's not like we can't afford it.
Ordinary people buy a piece of gold.
Yon goud foui tay
It's a man's world.
There is no such thing as grangou ba l la
I'm going to go up to the top of everything on both sides if one of you agrees.
How do you know what you're talking about?
Well, people don't listen to each other at the same time, they don't talk to each other, they don't talk to each other.
When you're ready to go to your grandmother's house, you're ready to cry.
There is no proof.
I know a woman or a man has the right to work for a sick person.
You are sick of the Athenian non-bakaman Evouman yo li
It's too much work.
If you need someone to compile the pain right now, you'll be fine.
Open your eyes to the light of day, Jehovah, and look at the eyes of a man.
One of them is David, who is also the son of Achil.
I'm going to let you go.
They're going to have to make a clean slate.
I'm not even going after Achilles.
It's all about the kids.
Once again, I can do it again and again and again, I can do it again and again.
Yeah, you've got some sweet wine too.
It's like winning a petition.
Now or never, you're going to have to eat it, now you're going to die.
Even if he doesn't want to go back, I'm going to go back now, sob.
It's going to be a big deal now.
as taken by the bay vwosanm
I am an anmanwiz anjan
The colour of the people takes up the tapay do zanjaden
or now w ap make a copy of the report.
I can take a picture of you right now.
It's not just me, it's everyone.
I can't wait to see what I'm going to do next.
He's not here right now.
A person who has passed you by the day of your birth, who is now a railway worker, is now you?
From now on, the two men will take the lead, and if your hand dies for the same thing, it will lead you astray.
I'm going to see you now.
It's great now.
Li do do Bandiri a w w listen to other yodiye w prit pwa nan soos, ti ak soos.
Mom, if you're a mom or you can't do it, you can't do it.
We need to make sure that you're the same person.
Mayanm gren yo yourself
I've been through it myself.
I'm going to do it for you.
I'm sorry, my mother is sorry.
There's a lot more to it than that.
Konn gen the same person
They know what they're doing.
I've always known him well.
I know a lot of women.
I don't know what to do.
If you choose to be a mother, no matter who you are, you won't have to be a mother or a mother.
They're not even there.
If you put on an anman Ayim, t ap wmentoran a dich force to hear you.
I promise you I will marry you.
A great generation to get married.
Sanmi sanm Kounpon or other yo konn flamay san
Now I know how to make kouch or dye or vann konn
I don't know if I'm going to buy or sell anything.
Now I'm going to buy a new one.
I've always wanted to ask for help.
It's the only thing I can do to make a difference.
"Lord, what have you done with Maya, what have you done with her?"
I, for one, will.
or boukanen l
I'm going to take it from here.
Take a look at what's going on.
Do you kiss me with a smile?
I'm going to do something I know I'm going to do when I get there.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
Yoonn fonn se debay like this
Grenn yo coole together
Ap onn bann yo now
Grenn yo kole tout.
Onan pitven may cook together in pi yo, chak pou or vanyen or van mwen or man or act you are now.
M pa tonen l la.
Yes, people like you.
I'm going to make it look like I'm going to take a picture of you and take a picture of you.
When your mother came to you, did you see Jakka?
What's the big deal?
Do you think I'm the best, or do you think I'm the best of Ms. Jakadou?
And, you know, I know how to speak, I know how to listen, I know how to listen, I know how to talk, I know how to talk, I know how to talk, I know how to talk, I know how to talk, I know how to talk, I know how to talk, I know how to talk, I know how to talk, I know how to talk, I know how to talk, I know how to talk, I know how to talk, I know how to talk, I know how to talk.
Kounn kouche chonjan yo kout ti kanmè, konnankman yo an an pou kout yo banje l, prey may?
Enoch, I'm here, or I'll take it for granted, or I'll take it for granted.
I'll buy a new one when the new one arrives.
I'm going to buy it.
I bought it in May.
They're behind him.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it or not, but I'm sure I'll be able to make it.
He knows what he's doing.
Or at least every day.
Take it or leave it.
I'm going to have to go back to my brother's house to get him back.
I'm going to take some flour.
I'm not sure what happened.
It's not my fault.
There are many ways to do this.
The people of Kunis once again.
It is all about everything.
epi ay lous before sa tou
It's not the only thing I can do.
It's not me.
I know how to live like this or take a se li thing or put
I'm a fan of the console now.
What do you mean?
I'm going to take the same to you.
All the things I'm going to do, I'm going to do, and I'm not going to be a big fan.
or bouyi or li
Toou l'homme conné li, manlé, manlé t la, li yon félé, we are going to be there.
It's not like we're all going to have to live with each other.
Other than that, you don't do it.
Consonmen, on the day of the mango too many ankou seremankou again sof ap rivè l, pou ou li?
I don't know how to get on my feet, but I can get on my feet.
After the three beef cattle, when they came to Bashan, they went back to the plain, to the land of Canaan.
I want to know what's going on, don't I?
W ap chte short la, fouyè?
What's the other way around?
The pill looks like a couchon or tea.
We are now in a position to make a decision.
They're with the Swedes.
Koutwil kouchon an
Or a cash advance from the concert.
We're not going to kill the beast.
I'm going to put it together.
It's a good idea to use this gene.
Everything is new to the wine in the room.
Everything I needed to buy.
What else do I know about consanble and apes osis?
I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell
Vyann sa li
I know you're new.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm going to give you a little bit of advice, and I'm going to give you a little bit of advice.
They're going to be the other way around.
Pi is the base of pi.
Why are you doing this?
If you're like Koukouy, you know how to make a business out of it.
I'm not going to lie, I'm not even going to lie.
I know that I know that I know that I know that I know that I know that I know that I know that I know that I know that I know that I know that I know that I know that I know that I know that I do not know that I do not know that I do not know that I do not know that I do not know that I do not know that I do not know that I do not know that I do not know that I do not know that I do not know that I do not know that I do not know that I do not know that I do not know that I do not
I'm confident that you'll be able to get in touch with me again.
The same bay.
May the Lord be with you.
You'll also be able to buy some of the men in your Serè a
I know how to sell, I know how to sell.
Yo an reli douz
Do you want to buy tibou?
I don't know what I'm talking about.
There are three types of grams.
It's all about the grimness.
If you're going to be a leader, you're going to be a leader.
The people of the country are in a state of confusion.
Yo tou louve li choudèv
I'm going to go to bed and I'm going to take men.
You're the one who's been convicted of a felony.
I'm going to have a birthday party.
I'm going to tell you the truth about it.
It's a great place to pee.
Drink a lot of water, make a mess, and do it.
You've got to be a man like that.
Representative antyon you are a person like ale
or santi an an
There are a lot of people who don't like it.
I've been waiting for you.
Who are you?
People who are interested in the world.
Men order yon acondicion, ti tak Eee, acondicion, ti one left, one left, one right, or one right?
And boum di konn borèy, even the sound of people sounding like a ton of borèy all the time, wa sonye.
There is no such thing as a demon in the back of a person's head.
They're old.
I'm very happy with it.
I can't wait to drink it with someone else.
It's not about what people say.
Are they ready to go?
Or you could say that you're going to die.
Or you know where you're going to be, where you're going to be, where you're going to be, where you're going to be, where you're going to be, where you're going to be, where you're going to be, where you're going to be, where you're going to be, where you're going to be, where you're going to be, where you're going to be, where you're going to be, where you're going to be, where you're going to be, where you'
He wanted to make such a difference in the lives of those around him.
I've got a picture of the people I serve.
In other words, there are many conditions.
I'm here to help you.
I'm not going to lie.
You're not going to be able to do it.
It's a short story.
They're going to redmi
There are other ways to live.
Do you want to be a devot today?
I'm not sure.
The birthday of the person who knows how to make money and how to make money.
I'm going to tell you about Nikola but you're going to win if you find a guy who's going to go with Kola and you're going to go with him.
Win bra su people who don't know what they're doing.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it through the next few weeks.
I'm betting they'll be back in the saddle.
These are the people who take the Tafia.
If you want to know more about it, you should be able to find out more about it.
They put on a pair of boots.
I put them together.
That's how much I want it to be.
I don't like it either.
Ringe Boutè Gòz, boun m, or de ou vin anché, sou or de ou vin anché, before you.
Akoumou is also the second chair of the labou
Since then, it has only been available to the general public.
They've got a ton of them.
If you're a Greek man, you're a Greek man.
It's all in your head.
There are two main reasons for this.
There are many tens of thousands of clergy.
Pa gen dwa pan sa short head so much.
When someone ends up with you like this.
I'm in the mood for something.
They're on the move.
They're going to make a difference.
I can't wait to get started.
I'm not going to interfere.
Who is the one who sells Iap Pranj Koukana too?
It's like I'm a big man.
I'm the one who's going to sell it.
Vandi Li decolled it at the same time.
It's all about the people.
I'm going to be fine without you.
Or wherever I'm going.
Or two poor people where I'm doing well without them.
That's how it's going to be.
I'm going to leave you alone.
I'm not sure I'm going to be able to do it myself.
It's like someone else's stuff.
I've kept it to myself.
Gounwa the man I know the man himself.
If you don't eat or drink, you'll be fine.
You're going to have to deal with demons.
The two of us eat together, so you don't get caught up in the devil.
If you don't know who you are or what you're going to be doing, you're not going to be able to do it.
Pa gen zab jan w konn like o
It's all about people.
Before you know who you are, you know who you are.
Or wait for a letter to tell you something.
I'm right in front of you.
In front of you or behind you.
Ravani de lakye very much.
How do you know what to do for the rest of the day, who knows who, who has the soul?
People don't want to be interviewed in such a way that they don't want to be interviewed.
Man is dead, man, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead, man is dead.
There's a lot more to it than that.
A good example of this can be found in the following paragraphs:
Or you can buy a pou sose.
Cond make yo gen people of k enfri jidèy
I'm not going to tell you what to do.
Okay, well Fredo mwen mès yo or, I ap w question, w answer in aman.
It's a lot of people's work.
There is a lot of people.
Well, like Fredorevèz, I'm always on the lookout for answers.
It can be found in Egypt.
or ap pale de
One boun has a lot of tea.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Or know a lot about it.
It's a guy who's a genius.
Pills or tea.
Or a tea pill.
Or a lot of tea.
I've been told a lot of times that I've lost it.
I don't know what I'm going to do with myself.
Who is the man?
It's all about the people you're talking about.
I've even lost a lot of weight.
I'm sure you'll find a lot of people who can't afford it.
There is no one to know about it.
I'm going to start every Sunday for the next year.
Pass it or leave it.
I know it all.
I'm going to give you Zalkadi.
I'm very happy with the new canvan.
I'm with you now.
I'm here to help you.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
I don't know how many times I've been there.
That's the way it is.
The generation of men who walk like a young man walks like a young man when he wants to.
I'm a retired pilot.
I want to go through it.
anvil or gen men
I can't wait to get started.
If you're going to sleep, you're going to sleep.
I'm not sure.
It's also a great way to get to know each other.
I'm going to send you a message to make a series of changes.
If a mouk is the same person as a benmande
It's been a long time since I've been here.
I don't even know what time it is to be alone.
It's not just me.
I'm sure they'll give you a pet.
It's a good idea to put it in your head.
It's a lot of fun.
It's like having a birthday party.
Pouzy pouzy said.
For those who want a wine, potan or people li, li pawawal or di li.
The people of the tankol are the people of the kemankod la
I don't know what else I'm going to tell you.
Tell me what?
Who has the power to pass?
I'll be right in front of the mango.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
They don't know what to do.
They also know that there is no such thing.
Vanko is ready to arrive.
OU Mèt like a rache
On the other hand, I'm going to have a friend of mine, and I'm going to have a great friend of mine, Eva Sefe.
Or you know how, well, you know how to get out of it.
It's also the first one to come out of nowhere.
I lost a lot of men.
I've ordered more than once.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it myself.
It's not like I've been banned.
Pass them through the world.
What is the meaning of life?
On the consya.
Do you know what to say about everything?
You can either work for one person or work for all of us, or you can work for all of us.
Rapid, I'm back again, and now, my colleague of the dead, my colleague of the dead, I'm back.
When a child dies, the child dies.
Jan before li other Jan before li
I don't have a single copy.
There's a lot of other people out there.
It's not like I'm going to let you down.
Or maybe it's just a matter of time.
All the time and all the time.
There's nothing you can do about it.
You're going to have to do what you're going to do.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it alone.
You can give someone a commission to buy food.
We can look at other papers, commissions, or other things like debal potonde ey a coffee pot.
For the second time in a row, the Commissioner's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Affairs has approved a proposal.
It's almost as if I can't find my way back to Obezwon.
As you live in Bezwon
If I can forget the other one, I can put it on the table.
How can you say that?
Where is the angel, where is the angel, where is the angel?
It's not your fault.
There's nothing else you can do about it.
Or where do you live now?
The radio thing a.
Esri like a person appears on the screen.
I'm in high school with a ton of other people.
I can't wait to show up again.
How long have you been here?
If you're going to talk to someone, you're going to have to go to bed.
It's not your fault that you're doing something wrong.
It's a great way to get to know each other.
I'm going to tell you something you can't do.
I've got you covered.
I've got my teeth.
The next thing I know, it's coming.
The talents are here.
If I walk with you, who will walk with me?
Or two people you want me to buy too much.
I didn't buy them and I didn't buy them.
I could fall into the trap of doing things.
They'll buy it.
I saw them.
That's how I feel about it.
To the people of Jakal I mean to the people of all the countries.
or of an all-embracing audience.
I'm going to the party.
It's as if people don't talk about many things as they do about each other.
I'm here to help you.
I'm not going to tell people what to do about it.
I can't wait for the wine to come out.
The network of people who don't want to fight.
I, too, am standing in front of you, and I am also standing in front of you.
Hey, one person, chak kout fou rèl, I ap mande ou, chak vous, de moun men mout, one person pande, one person swok.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm going to be interviewing people for everything.
I'm not going to lie to you.
He's like the kind of person who can't afford to work for you.
I'm going to work for a living or paycheck.
I want to be able to work for a living, but I don't want to be paid.
Now, when I'm done, I'm going to die.
I've been lucky enough to be able to get rich and have a good time.
What kind of man is he?
So rich, like a man and a woman, suppose chak kou frigen man.
Tell me what's going on.
I'd like to make a clean slate or something like that.
They're always on the lookout for chakou.
I can't wait to get my hands on it.
They're not going to be able to keep up with the hype.
Sa k brothers are now in receivership.
Now I know where I am.
What's all the fuss about now?
It's all good.
People who don't want to be sick.
It can be displayed or displayed.
or inter-relationship.
They will be intertwined with each other.
My dad knows his authority.
I'm going to tell you something about your father or grandfather.
If you want to win a prize, go ahead.
He is the father of the chief.
Who am I, and who am I, and who am I, and who am I, and who am I, and who am I, and who am I, and who am I, and who am I, and who am I, and who am I, and who am I?
There's a lot more to come.
I'm going to come here.
The men of the vineyards came.
The men are coming.
I'm not here yet.
It's time to get on with it.
If you can't eat them, will they take the wine?
Well, li, if you come to me, I'll tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm coming to the palace now.
Do you want to practise palay but come as if you need these people?
They came to me and told me how to talk to them.
I'm here to talk to you.
I came here to talk to you.
It's time for me to talk to you.
I'm here to talk to you.
People know they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick, they're sick
If someone else doesn't take them in, does he take them all in?
We, all you're going to do in the garden.
Is there anyone else who doesn't know what you're talking about?
What else do you think?
Malkre l malat lal nan jade, repandye l sa, or konn bay the kid in the ap ballerina?
Odi Bon, haven't I read it or am I going to read it now?
So now I'm going to tell you, is it like Bayizan, who doesn't have the money to report to you?
The person who is in charge of the operation is the person who is in charge of the operation.
It's either OK or not.
I'm a priest now.
The king or the king is the last of the elephants.
I think it's going to be a good time to think about it.
Or from a power source.
Or passing through or with a blade.
It is possible to release this person.
I don't have a bag or two.
I've been waiting for you to come up with something.
It's not a divan.
If you're going to be my wife.
My wife's wife is not in my life.
The order of the gen is given by the order of the gen.
I'm not going to lie.
My wife and I.
That's what I'm talking about.
And if you do, you'll never know.
They will be able to keep up with the demands of their customers and keep up with the demands of their customers.
Li tannman is a force to be reckoned with.
In the end, it can be as good as it gets.
The people I've been given are not perfectly good to me.
I can make you feel like you're on a mission.
The app is good.
Or by someone I know.
I'm going to tell you.
That's what I'm going to do with it.
I'm going to tell you.
Espo can be another way of looking at it.
You'll be able to find other ways to get to Espo and get to know each other.
If you don't want to go to school, you have to go to school.
I met you when I was in high school.
If you're going to school, go to school.
It's just that I'm not alone.
Anmi Wakan ordered the wheels.
When you see a school, such as a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a,
It's time to move on with your life.
Anpit Akunm and Nith Anman L
There's no need to worry.
I'm going to tell you a few things.
There's no need to go after them.
I'm going to talk to you later.
I'm talking about getting out of here so that someone can get there.
There's a lot of people out there who want to be a part of it.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
You've got a lot of people on your side.
It is derived from a
I just came out of the closet.
It's either a new or even a new one.
Whether it's the end of the year or even the end of the year.
derived from the consonant at the door.
It's the people who play it by ear.
Koum will come from a, wa konn diye la.
Or you'll send me a copy of the whole thing, or a copy of it, or a copy of it, or a copy of it, or a copy of it, or a copy of it, or a copy of it, or a copy of it, or a copy of it, or a copy of it, or a copy of it, or a copy of it, or a copy of it, or a copy of it, or a copy of it, or a copy of it, or a copy of it, or a copy of it, or a copy of it.
Men, such a thing I'm going to end up saying for me.
But I'm not sure I'm going to go through with it.
I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know,
What's in your mouth?
Can you tell me what you're talking about?
For example, when people inherit or inherit something from someone else, they are treated as if they had inherited something from someone else.
You know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
I'm happy to do what I want to do.
What's the matter with you?
What's the matter with them?
Wip, you do as silman an Moun, man nou kounm di M seven, M seven Mango, tel thing Zabouka, seven Mango past Zabouka.
One or two people can use it.
People are going through a lot of pain.
There are passengers and crew who can't afford to leave.
You know what I mean.
I'm sure you've heard of them.
We're not going to.
When I was younger, I was able to make a difference in people's lives.
That's why I'm here.
There is no one who can help you.
I don't know anything about it.
I'm going to tell you a story about how it all came together.
He's a good man.
I don't know about you.
My father can die, but I can't live without him.
Or it could be someone who's been working on it.
They're all part of it.
Li te pati e pou mwen or derived from bonen
There are no amendments.
If I could be the one to ask or be the one to ask, would I come?
Odi a, m m all since grandmothers, m bakou, m bakou, m bakou, why are you here?
Do you want me to go with you, or do you want me to go with you, or do you want me to go with you, or do you want me to go with you, or do you want me to go with you, or do you want me to go with you, or do you want me to go with you, or do you want me to go with you?
Tokou la, or do you know who or what is working for you?
Divi I did the job.
I'm going to have to touch my father.
Either there is work to be done, or there are many or two people, or there is a lot of work to be done, or there is no work to be done.
If you don't want to do this, I'm not going to do it again.
So many of them work outside the home.
Or two, or two, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three, or three,
Bakou, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa
I don't know who he is.
Or express or take your account of your time.
I can tell you the story.
I'm on my way.
Or to say or to come to you.
I'm not sure how to react to it.
Or take you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do you, or do
Ap or di: Or make spouse or omise
or lose or lose an account before or after arrival.
There is no other way to do everything you can or can't do if you don't want to.
I don't care if I'm being duped or embezzled.
When you're at school, you've got a problem with this guy, and you've got a problem with him.
I'm not sure what I'm going to lose when I go to school.
I've lost a lot of time in school, and I've met a lot of people.
Or you can be friends with the same person.
I can tell if I'm with someone who's on the other side of the door.
A friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of
I'm going to do something new.
I know I'll be there to tell you the whole story.
It's not the end of the world.
You've got a lot of love for me.
You've got to fight like a man who's a moon or something.
You asked me why I didn't answer.
I've been waiting for you.
It's not like I'm going to be able to spend my money every month.
They don't want to spend their money, they don't want to spend their money.
Konn de olye l member larryè a yon lap jouye
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do next.
It's a lot of fun.
I'm going to use Bon.
My father didn't speak for the people in the words.
A liter of words.
I don't want to do that anymore.
I don't know any of these words.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
These are the words that make me want to talk.
It's going to be a fast one.
I didn't see the video or anything.
I don't want to see a new video.
I don't want to see the new video.
I'm going to tell you a new video.
I'm going to make sure that I don't miss my dad.
How long has it been on a one-on-one basis now that I've been able to deliver it to you?
How much is enough?
They've never been friends before.
I told my dad I was going to be with an angel.
I can't wait to get there.
Tell me what to do with the men.
I don't have a copy of it.
I'm not going to say goodbye.
I'm going to tell you a good story about two men.
I can't help but wonder.
I'm not going to lie.
As far as I'm concerned, I'm not going.
The wine is now with the bovè
Or will now a pou l vin fache
I can't wait to see what's in store for me.
Li fache télé m pa vin now avec
It's all because of me.
Wine with him now.
I'm here because I'm going to take a look at it and I'm going to take a look at it and I'm going to take a look at it and I'm going to take a look at it and I'm going to take a look at it and I'm going to take a look at it and I'm going to take a look at it and I'm going to take a look at it and I'm going to take a look at it and I'm going to take a look at it and I'm going to take a look at it and
I don't know when I'm going to be able to talk to people.
Look at the person behind you.
Or they'll say I'm sorry.
I'm not gay.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
It's like looking at two people in a row.
I know of such people as you, and I know of such people as you, and I know of such people as you, and I know of such people as you.
Tel lagay li  tel lagay li
Wash your hands of latex.
As I have created the earth, you, you, you, and you, the earth, there is silver and gold.
Radil fin lave men lli
The earth is the source or end of all the earth or the universe.
or as someone who is not in a position to do so.
In addition to his passion for Waltann li
They're just like Waltann.
A lot of people are talking about your demons.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
I'm going to tell you about Maltann or Waltann now.
I'm going to try to help men.
In the case of Maltann or Waltann, it is not possible for people like this to be a boss.
Enkil will be on the entrance.
One or two enkil or two l'ap dérive
I can't wait to get in there.
I'm not going out.
I've been thinking about it before when I came out.
I've been waiting for you to come up with something.
pandenm m ap anteren l ap is derived from
Pandenm Because I'm going to come in and out the same way as men.
I don't want to buy a machine.
I've lost everything my mother has lost.
It's the papal thing.
I've lost everything in my life.
All menman papal
The pope is dead.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it to my mom's house.
They lost their mother.
They've lost their way as they're ahead of the curve.
Because they lost their mother, they lost their mother.
As a man of faith, I am with you.
They've lost their hands on them.
I'm not as good as I was before.
On the moun ap palavel takou doop tab ap palavel
You're not going to change anything unless you change it.
They're not going to be able to compete with each other anymore.
They're not new to the company.
There's nothing wrong with anything that's happening right now.
You can't tell me what's going on.
They are documented on an annual basis.
They don't understand.
A ton of things are on the line.
They're not going to say anything.
They do not understand that they are also guilty of sin.
I'm going to tell you a few times and a few times and I'm going to tell you a lot.
I'm going to try.
Sotapou tonba tonk two more days
They knew about Mijabiye's affair.
They are located in a small area.
I'm going to have to go back to the drawing board again.
I'm not sure what they're talking about.
Do you want me to look like a goat?
Can I not only do it again?
They can't be bothered.
Or I'm just saying that I'm not breathing.
I'm working to make a living.
It's a great way to get a job.
I don't want to do my job.
I've got a job to do.
Mwen eswiy taj won the people.
La like yo
I'm going to make it very important to me to be with this person.
It's about who you are or what you're looking for.
I'm going to take a look at it.
I'm going to do it all over again.
I've been working on it for a month.
I don't know about you.
I'll tell you what I'm going to do if I win like this or if I'm going to be a big fan.
I'm going to make it up to you.
I'm not going to be able to make it to the next level.
Anwenn bak onnen m gen de
It's not like you're going to be able to do it.
Now that I've been able to do something different, I'm not going to be able to do anything else.
I'm not going to talk about it.
It's a white card.
Go timon m card in the middle.
Or if you're one of them, or if you're one of them, or if you're one of them, or if you're one of them, or if you're one of them, or if you're one of them, or if you're one of them, or if you're one of them, or if you're one of them, or if you're one of them, or if you're one of them, or if you're one of them, or if you're one of them, or if you're one of them,
It's not just me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you
I'm not going to say a word, oh.
But if I see something, then I will win, and then I will win, and then I will win.
I'm going to do 2 things.
This is one of my favorite things to do.
I'm ready for it now.
Now I can write with a pen.
I can't help but wonder.
Now we have to take a look at the port.
Remember, I don't have to do that before.
I'm going to be a farmer.
Now that I've brought it up, I can't do anything else.
A man who had been sent to Pharaoh swore to take Zaboka or to be before him.
But no, I'm going to choose the same person.
Zaboka has faith in the pran.
I don't need to trust you.
I don't need to do this.
Take only the bookshelf.
When I met you in the same position.
I'm going to be a good guy.
I'm going to bring you a piece of the puzzle.
I've never been able to use it before.
Or at least take a look at it.
I'm sure you'll like it.
Bring the fig, I'm going now.
I'll take a look, a lot of other figs, on my quenn or a single connection to the pot, what am I going to do?
Erske m can take zaboka, w byen fig la, votland.
Trying to find a new place to live.
te dinsan deyay
There is no such thing as a downward spiral.
I'm going down to my house.
You can't steal anything from someone else.
the previous one.
I don't want to go back to the office again.
What I'm going to do is launch.
When someone steals from you, you steal from someone else to do something else.
Let there be a kingdom, all the children of men.
If you don't invite me to a party, I'll be there.
Or invite me to the anniversary of my death.
In order to get to know you better, I invite you to a party.
Men or women know how to live in poverty.
I want to buy it or I want to buy it or I want to buy it or I want to buy it or I want to buy it or I want to buy it or I want to buy it or I want to buy it or I want to buy it or I want to buy it or I want to buy it or I want to buy it or I want to buy it or I want to buy it or I want to buy it or I want to buy it or I want to buy it or I want to buy it or I want to buy it or I want to buy it or I want to buy it or
The men and women of a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a
You know me or I know you.
I'm either going to tell you guys or I'm going to tell you guys.
I can see that I'm doing my best for you.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know if anyone else is interested in this or that.
What am I supposed to do?
Do you want to know everything about it?
Antis m pa jan n yo wè prete?
I want to know everything about my people.
I don't want to say anything but no.
Appears to be all over the place.
Who knows what you're talking about?
I'm going to tell you all about it.
What can I do for you?
Can you or can't you or can't you?
What can I say or do?
Gravil Bazid, OK, I'm ready to go, but I'm not ready.
Well, like the Poton people, bring something big, like the wine, the Poton people.
Mobile, ap male who brings the new, who is a rap man?
Who's going to bring you the news?
What's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new, what's new.
I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know,
If you are a child of God or want to be a child of God, you are a child of God.
I'm not going to lie to you.
I'm not sure what to do with my mouth.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
Jan Ka dis an an kon
I'm a child of God.
If you want to enter Alkanba, you have to go to Alkanba.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it or not.
I'm not going to say anything about it.
I can't tell you what to do.
I can't wait to get to Tankou mache
I'm going to walk or I'm going to walk.
It's just like the march of Mbal Nan Mache a Se tan Bann Mache sa trivon tòti.
I'm not going to stop you from walking.
Well, I'm not going to, I'm not going to ban you.
Take a look at my tools.
Simdadon, the grandson of Tokou, toojan m ap doun fan, the grandson of Manyakou.
Now, I have many children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren.
If there is no bandzouti or if there is no such thing as a bandzouti, there is no such thing as a bandzouti.
I'm not a woman, I'm not a woman.
I will be your bridge.
That's when I got rich, that's when I got rich, that's when I got rich, that's when I got rich, that's when I got rich, that's when I got rich, that's when I got rich, that's when I got rich, that's when I got rich, that's when I got rich, that's when I got rich, that's when I got rich, that's when I got rich, that's when I got rich, that's when I got rich, that's when I got
If I don't have children or genes, my children will be under a lot of pressure.
Do you have a wife, a son, or a daughter?
What's wrong with my wife every day?
Se tanbou, who if he has only one wife, why can't he?
What's wrong with your wife every day?
It is either in the heavens, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky, or in the sky.
If you want to win, there is only one wrong, or you want to win, or you don't want to win.
All the lalin yo leve your day si pozè san lang lanm swa
It's the first day of the year.
I don't want to take it for granted.
Or don't take the grisabou.
Take my word for it.
Pran now I'm an an an
Pran is now on my way.
It's like eating or drinking.
It's like a new one.
If only I knew what I was doing.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
It's not like that anymore.
The shape of the wavelength is new.
The form of al wabliy Ye nou m ap me mal.
What if I could hurt you?
If you're going to get a Gelleo, it's going to hurt you, or it's going to hurt you, or it's going to hurt you.
I don't know what I'm doing wrong.
I don't know what I'm doing wrong.
If you want to be a tonban m
My friend's code.
It's the only way to stop it.
Your friend's code.
Prese chon mout mout l'apli kounm men or oth lan kouw Pran mout l'an pou mwen E tan anj
I'm not going to listen to you.
Sou ta gonp bann ami epi tapou
Jak Pyè bay said to you
Or they're going to want a new man.
Nou pop dem
or gen tis and malat.
Jak malad tout ap vle nonmen non Jak Mèt
A friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of
My friends are sick.
Masonry is not allowed.
A friend of mine is sick.
We're all going to have to deal with the disease.
Your friend is sick.
A friend of mine is sick.
Do you have the right to choose the right kind of person to serve as a volunteer?
Or pa bezwon, or pa bezwon tak or pa bezwon?
If such a person is a sick brother or sister, he or she will not be able to do so.
He was a man.
My brother's name is sick.
Since I don't want to talk to you, let me know if I'm going to talk to you, if I'm going to talk to you, if I'm going to talk to you, if I'm going to talk to you, if I'm going to talk to you, if I'm going to talk to you, if I'm going to talk to you, if I'm going to talk to you, if I'm going to talk to you, if I'm going to talk to you, if I'm going to talk to you, if I
This is a good chat that I'm sick of.
And if you want to distinguish me, if you want to talk to me, talk to me as a patient.
If you don't want to talk to someone who's sick, you've got to talk to them.
Chad sa yo ill, yo no woman in the chat lad WI, yo me?
E si chaplay, chap silay, mwen a lad.
Se one tagou in the day chat
One day you'll have a chat.
One of the men was so upset that I knew him.
I'm not going to chat with you.
We chat as a group.
Don't steal from me.
I can't wait to be here, I can wait to be here.
Do you want to talk to someone who is sick?
It's a very special place to visit.
This is one of my favorite chat sites.
Li vivin Mwen hear
It's not the same person.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
There is no such thing.
What's the bedside table?
Is there no room for you?
You don't know what's going on here.
I don't know what to say.
The people of Koujena kabann li an an
This is the first time I've seen this.
It's my cabin.
I don't want to talk to anyone else.
I'm going to go to bed and sleep at night.
According to other sources, no.
Tankou la w konn ap pa la an man
One step at a time.
They're not going to meet Paul.
I don't know what to do with Paul.
Do you know me or do you know Paul?
I know the last one.
I don't know if I've ever heard of it.
That's what I'm talking about.
I'm not sure if it's the same person or not.
Or to say that there is no such thing as existence.
It can be as good as good.
I can't tell you the truth about what I'm saying, not even Paul himself.
Give it to someone who is an anti-authoritarian.
Or they can say or do something more than I can say.
I'm done with the work I've been doing.
But, as if you were asking someone, to ask, "How are you doing?"
It's like Jacob is coming, or it's like Jacob is coming, or it's like nothing is coming.
Who's coming?
Well, how can we do things like I did to Jacob, or to Jacob, or to Jacob, or to David?
Li pa vini no.
Take, for example, for example, the Kaaba, and the Koun and the E three people, the Kre, the Kowou.
I won't, but I'll be there too.
I'm not going to lie to you.
What's in the kitchen, what's in the kitchen, what's in the kitchen, what's in the kitchen, what's in the kitchen, what's in the kitchen, what's in the kitchen, what's in the kitchen, what's in the kitchen, what's in the kitchen, what's in the kitchen, what's in the kitchen, what's in the kitchen, what's in the kitchen, what's in the kitchen, what's in the kitchen, what's in the kitchen, what's in the kitchen,
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm going to tell you something.
You can't beat me, you can't beat me, you can't beat me, you can't beat me, you can't beat me, you can't beat me, you can't beat me, you can't beat me, you can't beat me, you can't beat me, you can't beat me, you can't beat me, you can't beat me, you can't beat me, you can't beat me, you can't beat me, you can't beat me.
I'm going to take care of myself.
You're on your own.
And that's the way it is.
Whether I am or am not able to stand up for what I want or want to stand up for what I want to do.
I'm going to tell you about it.
Will you come to me?
It's like you want it.
Or you want me to be a man.
Or you're going to have to pay your bills.
Or a few minutes with me If you're going to tell me what to do, I'm going to tell you what to do.
I'm not from the same place.
Is there a condition in the body?
You're in a condition that makes you feel better.
It's like a batman's combo.
That's one of the conditions.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
What do you think of me?
I, who is the Lord of the people of Patil, am I able to say or do anything to make you come home?
Kounn a, yo derive at home?
Or if you're going to fight a war to plant a plant, you're going to have to fight a war.
It is possible for wine to be consumed in the same way as wine.
Yes, that's right.
Or flattening my pocket.
And if something is forbidden or prohibited, then the canon is forbidden.
I don't want to give up on it.
I'm not sure if this is true.
It's been a long time coming and it's been a long time coming.
I'm not sure what's going to happen.
Pass it on to them.
They're happy too.
Let's see what you've got.
Because you're a man.
P de ou, fò ou benjon tou ap pale moun si you m fouye.
P ap de ou fouye.
Or is it my fault?
Are you going to repeat what I'm saying or do you want me to say it again?
Why do you think that the new timon l, the new tradition, the new party, what questions will be asked?
I'm going to have to go back to the car.
I've been waiting for you to come up with something.
I'm going to tell you what to do.
It's about people who work for or without money.
It's not like I'm going to make a mistake.
Or finish the job.
It's not like you're going to be in a box.
I'm going to ask you a question.
There must be at least two ways to get the job done.
Or say anything at all.
I can tell you what I know.
Tell me how to get the job done.
I'm not going to lie to you about it.
They're in the middle of a job.
What do you want to do with it?
Alas, if you don't know if you're still there, are you still there, or are you far from there?
Or, how can we pay for it ourselves?
Ooh, or can you eat a little more of it?
Speaking of which, who's going to hit the ball?
Or are you waiting for me?
Man is an anti-man, or man is an anti-man, or man is an anti-man, or man is an anti-man.
It's not just the elections, it's the people's elections, it's the people's elections, it's the people's elections, it's the people's elections, it's the people's elections, it's the people's elections, it's the people's elections, it's the people's elections, it's the people's elections, it's the people's elections, it's the people's elections, it's the people's
There's a lot more to it than that.
Or pose yo sou met on mo la
My mother?
What's the matter with you, my mom?
One man is dead, two men are dead, and one man is dead, and one man is dead, and one man is dead, and one man is dead, and one man is alive, and one man is dead, and one man is alive, and one man is alive, and one man is alive, and one man is alive, and one man is alive, and one man is alive, and one man is alive, and one man is alive, and one is alive, and one is dead.
What are you going to do about it?
Wow, wow, you know what I'm saying, but what's your point again?
Or they don't know what they're doing.
Or they don't know anything about it.
They don't know what to do.
I know I've been there before, but I'm not sure what else I'm going to do.
I'm going to tell you about Wouwou.
A cone or a di?
And if someone or something is going to kill you, it's going to kill you.
It's what you want.
I'm going to tell you a story or two.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it myself.
I'm going to try to get back to the drawing board.
I'm not sure what to do with it.
It's all in your head.
It's not like that anymore.
I'm not going to tell you what to do or what to do about it.
What's the matter with you and me?
If you are a man, if you are a man, then you are a man.
Such as sote sout kale li an pi ret nan such as en baryan m reply
I can't wait to get back to you.
For example, you may have a nipple or a tooth or a tooth.
I can't answer that question.
The apothecary and the apothecary answered the question.
After hearing the report, I responded.
I'm not going to answer.
Men and women who have lost their lives in poverty.
How do I respond to people?
It's about people who don't know how to do something that's going to happen to you.
How long do you want to do it?
Man, I want you to do that.
The people who wanted to get rid of a bagal were there.
What's the matter with you?
I'm going to have a deli.
I'm not sure if this is true.
It's not like you can ban me.
When you're at work or pwap, you don't have to.
If you don't work, or if you don't want to work, it's okay.
What do you think?
Do you want to get a job?
It's time to get to the bottom of it.
There are several beds in the house.
Or you can boun't.
It's not like I'm going to sleep.
Like if you can or can't.
They don't want to go to bed.
I'm going to tell you my story.
I can tell you how much I love you.
What do you think of these men?
Now I know that I can do it for a week.
You're the only one who can do the same thing.
You can do a lot of things on your own.
I'm going to tell you.
Such as swal bwaw w things that are in good condition.
I don't even have a head.
They, too, were in their diptan, drinking from it.
They're even self-aware.
People who don't have enough money don't always have to take care of themselves.
There is no one who can stop Mary from doing what she is doing.
There is no such thing as a poor person.
They still don't exist.
They're always at concerts with us.
There's nothing wrong with that.
And if you drink glass and drink wine and drink glass, what will you do with it?
I don't know if I'm going to make it.
It's all in your head.
I want to say a word before I say a word at the end of a word.
w ap pale epi epi
It's either you or me.
I'm not going to buy it in January.
I'm not sure about that.
They're saying they're going to buy something.
It's not like I'm going to put a lot of pressure on myself.
I'm going to take your money and tell you who bought it, even if you don't ask me.
Or something else.
Anpou or nou longye li in m
I don't have a room and I don't know what I want.
Lafesiv a be my wyon an an, wonderful, evi m m m mando o, or, m ap m m m m m m m m m something to do with m m m m m?
What is the meaning of life?
How much does it cost?
Give people what they need.
Things aren't exactly right now.
as if they were banned.
They're doing things right now.
They're going to tell you about a man and a woman who can make a difference.
M tè lwagay is now mann form
I'm not going to lie to you guys.
They're not going to be able to keep up with me.
M pa ou
I don't know.
Pa t ou wè or Oi m
It's not like I'm going to tell you.
It's not good enough.
That's what you are.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Why can't you save me?
What's the matter with you?
Hey, I'm ready, as a signado swal te gen an, you're going to have a problem or you're going to have a problem.
I'm sick, they're sick.
Well, people are talking about it, I'm talking about it.
I was sick.
It's been a long time since I've had a swallow before.
M ap vini, kounya an?
M ap now.
Eyisye or like a lapliy ap fall, many remonn and not really come up, pran pran.
Who wants to be a human being, who wants to be a human being.
It's a bit like a tap tape, I said.
And, of course, if you don't, I won't.
This is another book.
It doesn't matter what you're doing.
When this man comes to know that I am from God, I will come to know him, and I will come to know him.
I don't know how to order jen ankan
I don't know what I'm going to do.
Men are not going to die, and they are not going to die.
He invited her to his home.
It's the same as the epiphany.
Either they're on their own or they want to get out of the way.
Or they can get away with it.
It's time for me to say goodbye and nothing to come again.
There is no such thing as a happy ending.
I don't know where I am right now.
Fresh or early in the morning.
I'm not here right now.
It's either a or a.
I'm going to be here right now.
I don't want to lose you.
I don't know who you are, I don't know who you are.
There are many, many of them.
I don't have a lot of money.
I'm going to listen to you.
I've been around so long.
Especially people who are old enough to know better.
Bwan santi, come, an annim that I can eat, I want to eat, because if I'm thirsty now, they know how to put it on.
M pran sant li, the saint is now l.
You're going to kill someone.
They can take a piece of advice.
I'll give you some advice.
I'm very excited about it.
They don't forget their advice.
I'm here to help you.
How are you doing?
If I can't believe it, I can't do it, I can't believe it.
And how can anyone be one of those people who don't exist now, another of those who don't, or who don't?
If a member of parliament is a member of parliament, he or she is a member of parliament.
Where do you go from here or where do you go from here?
Anmanm Kounya is the same as yo
On the outside, people are so distant and annoying that they've just come, and they're so happy that they're still alive.
I can't bring you a man to tell you the news.
The message is that no one is going to be able to hear the news from anyone who comes to the news.
One or two of these people can be found here.
To tell the person or to give him a key to his life.
If you want to know how to lose weight, you need to know how to lose weight.
I'm so grateful to you.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
I'm sure you've heard of them.
I'm going to have a guy with a compact zipper like that.
This is what they do to their children.
There's a lot more to it than that.
There is no doubt about it.
There's also an app for it.
Li da ben knows how to use it.
Antout quelques zèb, or t al quelques zèb, as such do zèb.
prwa prache zèd
Fyi is not a life of its own.
What do you want to do now?
Do I see it now?
Do you want to start a new life or do you want to start a new life?
Where's the wine in the men's room, huh?
How would I know what to do with my life?
The head of Timon is the child chote
People don't want to be children and they don't want to be children or anything.
I'm going to explain to you the same thing that's going to make the baby cry.
There's no one to blame when someone stands up and speaks.
Everything that passes through.
It's hard to beat people.
I'm a man of the people.
They can't beat me.
It's hard to believe that when you hear someone say something to you, you never talk to them.
Is it possible to hear a man say a word from God in a certain way, so as to call out to him?
Or can I?
Am I going to kill anyone?
Do I doubt whether I know or not?
Do I know where I'm going, or do I know where I'm going?
An elf and a goose can call a poor person a goose, or they can say nothing.
Before or after you, or if you need someone else, and or if you don't want to come.
Or don't need it anymore.
They're either on the other side of it or they're on the other side of it.
Li pa the same benzen jou ni an
It can be used for a wide range of applications.
I can't wait to replace it.
Or you don't need that anymore.
Or with a net.
O kont, di ounvan: Bondi ti man nou, kade, tel baga or your adult, pi ga or your adult?
Oh, those who are now in the past, those who are now in the past, or those who are now in the past.
Who are you now?
They're good people.
Or, including Jeremiah members.
I'm going to try to find a solution.
Bonè party because you are a member of such a group.
It's either the same or different.
This is why I am a part of Bonè a.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
There will be no more sink.
Now you're going to have to do something about it.
The other side of the fence.
For the next few months or so, I'll be there.
Thank you for your support.
If you are looking for a new one, you can find a new one.
below or gen.
I've been waiting for you to come up with a solution.
I don't know if I'm going to make it to the fourth party.
And if a machine like this doesn't pass
We're going to have to go through a lot of things.
One or two machines are used for this purpose.
I want to be with you.
Or your friends don't hear today a machine I'm going to break down.
I can't stand it for a year.
tel thing or chilita
w ap lev stood up again or di mwen
The next step is to get ahead.
You're the chief of staff.
The chief of staff will be there.
Like I said before, it's a good idea.
or wè m renmi
I'm standing on the edge of my seat.
Let's get to the bottom of it.
How long have you been here?
How do you know if you're going to be able to do it?
What's the point of that?
Pito chita, like the pou people know such a thing.
It's also the only thing I've ever done that doesn't make sense.
You can find out how you know what you're talking about.
In front of the chare a kontan ti la yo
That's why I'm going to drink it.
The men are going to die.
I'm also a fan of the fall of charel.
Tan kounm chak fil pase
You're not going to fight me.
I've seen a lot of them.
They can be billed as human beings.
They're totally out of touch with him.
I have researched the l. inter.
If I can, I can, I can, I can, I can, I can, I can, I can, I can, I can.
They love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, they love me, and they love me.
He is also a man of war.
Such as ap doing m
It's like two bad guys are going to do what they don't know or what they're going to do.
Menchanste pa ba re manchè
I'm going to tell you about Menchanste.
Menchan Ste Pashe has made glasses.
There are no glasses.
We are looking for a pair of glasses.
What is the use of glasses?
I'm going to tell you something.
I'm going to have to do something about it.
I've been waiting for you.
La pi kab like yè swal a pi falls and when la pi falls, i don't want to live.
Kab pi falls, but takou after d men, we fall.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
They're going to fall apart.
They fell all the time.
It's not like I'm falling apart every day.
I like to start on a Sunday lesdi.
I'm going to fall or I'm going to fall.
I'm going to tell you something.
The history of men and women has changed.
Who are you happy with?
There is no such thing as God or money.
The bond is not money.
I'll see you in the front row.
God's grace is sufficient for us.
The goddess of the gods is God.
They did the things of God.
Do you know how to open them?
Poukond li machina part Ak o deyè
How many machines are there?
Now you know how to drive a car.
It's all in your head.
It's for children.
Children who have been abducted from their homes.
I'm a little boy and I don't know what to say to Paul.
Children with disabilities.
Paul was a child.
Well, for the sake of a devou, for the sake of a tayou.
I'm going to lunch, have a cup of coffee, but I'm not going to eat anything, I'm going to lunch.
It's up to the person to do it or not to do it.
As if you knew who the father was.
And then there's the applause.
I'm not a father.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
I'm not sure.
Or know li, or know goldon.
Two weeks later, I fell asleep.
I don't know if it's a party.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Or, at least, why is there so much of it?
How can you do that?
What's the big deal?
There are many more genres, gen mann.
Men often send people to pakou yo, french, anman, pou zi yo, men often send people to eat in french.
I can't tell you what to do when you're new.
We can't wait to see what you come up with.
I can't wait for your birthday to come.
As a matter of fact, I can say that when things fall into the net, they fall into the net.
It's not that we don't know, it's that we don't know how to protect them.
Li protegri Se koto w la
The mango has just fallen.
They knew I was going to fall.
When I send you, like others, they come together and pass by me, pass by me.
Do you know how to do that?
You're in my head.
Reyaz himself is an an
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you.
I'm going to do my best.
Can I thank you for that?
If I buy a benzene jacket, I can get a jacket.
Gen dway yon n vwo kochon
Dway yon n ti kochon gen dway yon n ti kochon
It's not a matter of money.
How do we get money on time?
A child can win an adult Jita la yon de Lade children to make a mess Bakot Granmoun da
There is a code for ordering yon anpan.
This was the beginning of the Bakot Granmoun riots.
I don't know what to do anymore.
There is a lot of disorder in Bakot anke adult
Let's take a look at this one.
Tanbou is a tanbou that is different.
I'm going to tell you something.
They can do that.
They can be bon mache
It's going to be a big hit in September.
What are we going to do?
If according to Tanbou, can I be a seven-year-old?
It's so hard to be a man, a man with such a passion, that I don't have to go through with it.
Tokou menkay la, menkay la, li as if they were to know me, they knew each other's passions.
No, ann tankay la.
No, not at all.
It's not like La Kou a.
It's like a .
I'm going to tell you something at noon.
It's just that Mommy is a man.
You're the only one.
Or do they tell me that they're not in my area?
I knew you before I came to Ukraine before I came here.
Now that you've seen me, I'm sure you'll need your help.
Don't give me a job to do.
Or to make a quick bagal when the end is near.
It's time to get to the end of the valley.
I'm not going to work to make a living when I'm working on your table.
Whether I want to or not so I can do the job.
I finally made it through.
On the same day as I did it.
They can do their job when they're ready.
Don't work for the new valley.
I don't want to work and I don't want to work anymore.
I don't want to work and I don't want to work anymore.
I don't want to work in a new place.
I want to do my job in a new way.
I want to do my job.
There are people who owe money.
I can't wait to see what I can do.
I'm not ashamed of myself as I am of myself.
He owes a lot of money.
Rakanm dilodja the number of layers.
I've heard about the doctor.
You know someone else can't hurt you.
Or pack a tofu or two li.
Or someone who doesn't like others like la wa
I don't want to go to work.
I'm going to tell people what I'm going to do.
It's a series of pancakes.
You can either work or travel far away.
I don't want to work.
I don't want to work for the government, I want to work for the people.
It's not like I'm going to go to the bathroom or the bathroom.
It's either a or a.
I'll tell you what I'm going to do.
Can I still be happy, or can I still be happy?
Therefore, men, make my daughter happy.
It's not easy to see the difference.
Inisye tifis a tea thing beautiful
They're just sitting in front of the camera.
It's better to do something.
It's a good idea for you to have a good time.
It's like being a diva.
There is a great deal of confusion between the people of the country and the people of the country.
Or can or can't someone stand in the footsteps of men?
In order to make the best of it, there is a growing doubt.
They work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work, when I work
Or those who are brave enough.
anwanm tou yo
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
Some of the men who fought in the battle were either men or women.
or use a my
Where can I take my wife?
Now you have a ruler.
He knows the flight.
That's more than enough.
It's the only thing that matters.
I'm a big fan of this too.
But it's good that I'm a Ferem and you're on top of me.
I can't or won't tell you.
Or you could be able to see whether or not the men needed to inform you.
Or say something along the way.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
Tell the thing of the road that is good for the good of the world.
This is not the way to go.
This is what happened to Moulore.
The people of Zion are sitting at the door like this.
They're so quiet I'll give them to you.
It's good to be back.
How many people can pass through a car?
If you live before I hear you, I'll sit for two nights.
It's not like I've never been there before.
I'm too old for it.
And since I was born, as a man who would never go out of his way, they met me at my feet.
It's a good thing you don't know what you're talking about.
I can't wait to get back to you.
I'm going to try to get back to you.
or rebooted.
or rebooted Men
Eleon people like la Sòt ap kache for the hearing li w ap a lot
Do I appear to be the only person in the world who has come to know me?
to appear as I appear as I appear as I appear.
They've been working hard on it.
My husband lives like this, works like this, or looks like this, but looks like this.
Alan, now I'm going to have to do the same thing, so how do you feel, now that you're close to me, how do you feel?
They're going to tell me, they're going to tell me, they're going to tell me, they're going to tell me, they're going to tell me.
Who knows what's going on now?
I'm going to give you an example of this.
There is no such thing as a no-nonsense.
It's the same with the malab men, now I know it now.
So, malab men, now l la, m ap now, m ap now, m aladè much.
When I was younger, I was so young, man.
Esyou ti don, ann now, sophi ann now, tell the thing and see me.
You can find out about it now.
I'm not going anywhere now.
I'm going to see Jeremiah.
Now it's more important than ever.
I'm going to Jeremiah.
The syllable is one of ten.
The challenge is to come.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to get a job or not.
Anpou di on other bayè m
I'm going to make an order.
M ap prese a a
I'm not going to be able to do anything about it.
I can't wait to get to know you.
I can't tell you what to do.
I've been waiting for you to come out of the closet.
I can't put my finger on it.
They're going to fall, they're going to fall, they're going to fall, they're going to fall, they're going to fall, they're going to fall, they're going to fall, they're going to fall, they're going to fall, they're going to fall, they're going to fall, they're going to fall, they're going to fall, they're going to fall, they're going to fall, they're going to fall, they're going to fall, they're going to fall,
I'm a barit and I'm the one who sits at the table.
There are a lot of other people out there who have a problem with it.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do next.
Some people interfere with it.
Gen tel li or dou wangay
They are equal to the people.
How do you know what's going on?
Now, there's no such thing as a free lunch.
In front or behind or behind.
I'm going to tell you a story.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
There is no such thing as an orphan.
This is the first time I've been able to do this.
It's as if a room has fallen, people have fallen, people don't sweat.
I'm falling to the ground.
For a good day I'm falling down.
I'm just saying that there's something wrong.
I'm going to fall down.
They're not good enough to get in the way.
It's a good idea if you're going crazy.
I know that you're going to be a good boy.
If someone wants to rapay, take something.
Wherever they go.
To do the work of a living M
Pets can wear trousers and short trousers.
They are very close to each other.
Short trousers and a pair of shorts.
I can see why you also need all the pants and for everyone to wear a pair of pants.
If you've received it, you're still there.
Nou vat fin mezien vatalon an
Both of them have been accepted.
If you want to know who I am, I'll tell you.
Or you'll be as bad as the rest of me.
Or ban anyone from doing so.
Or ban anyone like you.
Do they know it, do they know it, do they know it, do they know it, do they know it, do they know it, do they know it, do they know it, do they know it, do they know it, do they know it?
Anvi all the greens are on the net.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
There's no such thing as a count.
She said: Oh
They're going to have to come to an end.
If you don't want to talk about it, or if you don't want to talk about it, you can't do it.
When I met you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I saw you, I
I'm going to tell you about it.
No, it's time for you to set up Amdavou.
Do you have two pancakes on your head?
Can you tell me what else to do?
How do you get to the Chapel of Chichu, Doctor Yon Man?
I'm on my way to wine.
I have never tasted wine before.
I've got a long way to go.
There's something wrong with that.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
There is no wine in it.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
Well, that's why I'm here, and I'm here for you, and I'm here for you, and I'm here for you, and I'm here for you, and I'm here for you, and I'm here for you, and I'm here for you, and I'm here for you, and I'm here for you, and I'm here for you, and I'm here for you, and I'm here for you, and I'm here for you, and I'm here for you.
There are many people out there who don't know what they're talking about, who don't know what they're talking about, who don't know what they're talking about, who don't know what they're talking about, who don't know what they're talking about, who don't know what they're talking about, who don't know what they're talking about, who don't know what they're talking about.
There is no explanation for anything.
or explicitly to a la.
or besan or e
You know what they're talking about, you know what they're talking about.
When is the master, the bagal, the bagal, or the wise?
Rebecede m, me or y apandi sa, how can i do this to you?
Or do you understand me?
Do you know anything, or can you understand anything, or can you understand anyone?
or fanman l
I'm not a fan of the show, but I'm a fan of the show.
You can use it to help people in your home.
I'm also very happy with it.
You can see the person who's doing it.
There is no problem.
Men are also at ease.
They're not comfortable with it.
You're also comfortable at home.
They feel comfortable at home.
Tokouze tout zod this or of this person
There is no problem.
The men of the town are in a state of disrepair.
Manmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanmanman
That's why I'm here.
Takvil tap vou
Roch a pit.
The pocket of the ale.
When he died, he fell to the ground.
I'm going to fall down.
They're my dad's.
On the way, I'm going to tell you.
They fell down loaded.
I'm going to be a dwak.
I can't wait to fall in love with you.
This is not a bad thing.
In order to do this, he sent me a letter.
The order of the genie tea comes with the order of the genie tea tea tea.
Who are you?
To someone or under someone who has taken a lifespan.
Punjanm e o bale as there are
They're farmers.
They're just farmers.
I've never been in a relationship with a woman before.
The castle takes its name from the name of the castle.
The past is a missionary experience.
It is possible to grow plants and plants.
When you don't have a good man, you don't have a good man.
There are also two machines.
It is possible to predict the future of the machine.
There is a problem with gasoline.
I'm going to take a car or something.
I've got a lot of Galician friends.
They won't be able to afford it.
It's not a palm tree.
If you don't know, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you
When it's cold, it's cold, and I know it's cold.
Do you have too many siblings?
I fell into a pile of rubbish.
I'm looking forward to the next one.
Look at the two of them and see if they can make a mountain outdoors.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it or not, but I'm not going to be able to make it.
There's no such thing as a home.
during the war.
They are just in order.
E, or t apte omnob bay, li jis order to ban.
Now, just as you're a member, when I'm a member, I'm wearing a shirt.
You can't be a good person, you can't be a good person, you can't be a good person, you can't be a good person, you can't be a good person.
Se, sa k pi granm or di Oh, li granm pase m longitan, pelò kompo, such as m alad or kok bò.
This is why we are here with each other, and we are here with each other.
I'm going to tell you what it's all about.
You can miss as much as I can.
But, like a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipotle, a chipot
There are two kinds of people.
I can't or won't give a shit.
Who are you?
Who is devou gen ank who?
Or you're going to have a problem with your past.
or pa ale
You can't beat those people.
The chief is the head of the country.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
No one should be held accountable for anything that prevents me from raising everyone to sin or stealing.
It's something no one can stop.
Is there anyone in front of the LAP who would know whether or not we should be radicalised?
Lwijan, since you're not on this list, you're very happy with your wife, hey, yeah, I'm going to start with you.
Vwala, who won 3 captains, men, the chief of Malis, who have been doing so ever since.
Yo yo mounche
This is the first time I've seen it.
A person who is able to make a living from it is a person who is able to make a living from it.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you.
I'm going to sell it to you and you're going to sell it to me.
I want you to.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
Or live in such a small town.
Or something like that.
You're going to do the right thing.
They always take it.
It's still the same as it ever was.
I'm only a fan of myself.
It's hard for me to do anything like that.
Di manchen an an ven de
It's from here on out.
They'll come back here.
One of the other is a good one, and the other is a good one.
There's something wonderful that's going to be in your heart.
It's either good or bad.
I thought I was going to be able to do it again.
I'm going to sell it to you.
I'm going to tell you something about my life.
They're not going to be able to keep up.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
They're doing a.
Salye fè y ap is performed with sentiwon, dajan, bouklon, sentir isit li, but nobody canzan.
Now that I've finished high school, I've come up with a publication for everything.
The last person to appear to tell you your story, all of it, but for me to celebrate my birthday at noon.
Malismen m with verad sa lanwoli, and ap pye sa yon barye, yo diri so a.
The lips of the mistress.
There's nothing wrong with all those people.
They don't know a bay.
It's all about the people.
I'm trying to avoid it too.
What are some of the people who don't want to do it?
A plaque can be placed on the crown.
Some of the people I've invited to visit have the opportunity to tell people things if they know they can or can't.
I've been waiting for you.
I'd love to hear it again and again with a penny of a dime and a book.
The other side of the story.
I invite you to the Semalis.
For example, fishing is a love affair with an onm blande a.
If you can make wine at home, you can make it clean.
Come and get acquainted with your home.
Piske yo poppo repò nou
And it's because people like to be black or white.
It's the first time I've seen it.
He's the kind of guy you want to be.
They don't belong here.
It's time to move on.
Yo an Yo now t ap a bay
Now all the people are here.
Refining things now.
La pete bay, or two can do everything.
Even though I've been crying, I've been crying, I've been crying, I've been praying.
M alispon, you pray for yourself.
A, blan I'm full of your bottle, no prete pata, you pray tout bay, blan now everything.
You're going to have to put your money where your mouth is before you put your money where your mouth is.
They'll find someone.
I'm going to give you a new one.
It's up to you how you feel.
There is no such thing as a Malaysian.
I'm going to take my dad away from my room.
It's not the end of the world.
I'm going to be with an angel.
There are many women in the world.
The men's name is silken.
They were taken by the Wodèp
There is no such thing as a soup.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
A di nonmou or p p p ap kase w to listen behind my mouth touchye Mali veja
I'm not able to do it.
That's what I'm going to do right now.
The words are very good pwap
If you lie down in the middle of nowhere, you're going to have to clean everything and clean everything.
One of them is the one who's going to kill him.
One day I'm going to go back to the drawing board.
It's very good.
I'm very happy with my other boss.
It's a great way to get to know people.
I love you and I love you too.
A, the menmen themselves came from al bay vwale, o, they counterfeit, i don't counterfeit, in fact, i'm al bay mandi.
I'm in the middle of something.
Now you can't afford to lose your children's lives.
There's no way I'm going to be able to help you.
I'm also going to tell you that I'm going to be able to do two things.
Kant renmese malè
It's in the middle of nowhere.
The men's pedestrians can be too pale to begin with.
Avwal is too late to say anything.
The leaves are too pale.
I'll tell you what I'm going to do next.
You're going to win the chat avètche.
Demi Sièje is also fit for purpose.
live lalkayon chat live lalkayon chat
You can't take a dollar with you.
Disclosure of my work for you.
A dollar is a dollar that I can't live without.
They are no longer fans.
They're going to be all over the place.
It's not like I'm going to make a mistake.
They live in the same people.
There is no one in the council who will be able to do it.
I'm going to kill Chen Ba O.
Men can't wait to see where they can take it.
It's not easy for me to do that.
They can't be chey
I'm going to talk to you about what I'm going to do next.
They put together a three-game losing streak.
They want to be trapped in a trap.
You're going to have a good time.
I'm going to kill you.
The band is headlining the banmen.
I'm on the other side of it.
They took the manet dipou y ap law and ga ga gade li li
We're talking about the fact that there's no such thing as a free lunch.
I'm going to do my best to get back to you.
Gen on fisikout k ap fall
W mach gen wè long m can be lit
The physique of the gen k ap falls.
W mach wè gen long m can net
I'll sing you a song.
I can't wait to go home and have a drink.
I'm drinking wine at home or I'm drinking too.
M tandè or pechant or an chant
They don't want to be your boss or your boss.
Either you're blind or you're going to die.
or face-to-face or face-to-face.
It's too late to die too.
Gonvigi short k ap mourit
They are directed towards their health and well-being and money.
Ni everything ni Tafi a ma ale hear
to win a great cricket match.
I know what you're talking about.
A good mother can have children.
Two cricket matches will be played here.
The man for the doll is going to be the man for the doll.
They're going to come and sit down and talk to me.
They came and sat down to break it down.
I'm going to break it down.
Good Malfini with an encapsulation.
I've seen him play cricket.
I'm ready to move on with my life.
Li franchi sou pou l' litue l E cha se se te ve om alfini an ponje sou pou l' la
I've never been so fond of you before.
lead to malfini and then fwon
I can't help but wonder.
Kill the cricket.
I'm going to kill her.
Chasse killed the malfini an
It's a very beneficial thing.
In the end, everything kills enrikid leman, or salt chasrèk benesifiye, or pou l.
Adatayem or E, Mali di Nonmou, my little girl, my brother, how am I going to live now?
Men, men, what are you going to buy?
Cond hand sef 3 sefizou
I'm going to tell you about my mommy.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it.
I made my debut in front of the Malis masses.
I know you well and I know you well.
They don't want me to leave them alone.
That's a good thing.
When you're a monk, you've got to know what you're getting yourself into.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to keep up with the demand.
My mother ordered me not to go to Malis to pay for it and I told her to come to the end of it.
It's time to get back to the ranch.
It's not just about the people, it's about the people, it's about the people, it's about the people, it's about the people, it's about the people, it's about the people, it's about the people, it's about the people, it's about the people, it's about the people, it's about the people, it's about the people, it's about the people, it's about the people, it's about the people, it's about the people.
Well, Mommy, how are you doing?
Oh, monsignor, what a confident tone!
When I came back to the temple, they came back to the temple and brought them back.
And even the mothers of Malit tibizaske are not the same as the mothers of Malit.
They asked their father.
I'm going to get rid of them.
Let's talk about them.
I bring them to them.
I don't know.
It's all coming to an end.
If they can't come back, they can't come back again.
Or I can't help it.
My grandmother and grandmother have a lot to do with this recipe.
My dad is fine again.
They're all the same.
It's the way of my wife or husband.
Li Di Nam on the way to his wife's house.
You're going to have to go to the bathroom.
Before you're an adult, you're an adult.
I'm going to have to go back to the drawing board, but I'm not going back to the drawing board.
I know how to farm a garden, how to farm a garden, how to cook potatoes, but I know how to cook them too.
I tried to kill his teeth.
If I can't kill myself, I'm going to kill myself.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
I'm going to eat potatoes and I'm going to kill myself.
They look at each other and look at each other.
I'm going to pick up some potatoes right now.
They're going to kill me again.
Because of this, you can get potatoes and chicken right now.
Other than that, I can get some potatoes for you right now.
It's going to kill my pet again.
It's not the same as having a genetic disorder.
Bouki told the people that he was going to die.
The men of Malis wine are two Kay la.
Bouki's tone is quite different here.
Boukouman came up with the idea of Kay la li.
Bouki told me how much I missed it.
Kay la t ap bel sou de met bay sa including ton Bouki.
This is my new baby.
I can't wait to get back to you.
They tell me they're going to kill me.
I'm missing out on the widow's book.
I can't believe I'm going to be here tomorrow.
The men were able to reach the river.
I'm going to try the krill.
Now you can bring it to me.
The entrance is located in the path of the tramway.
Empi l mare demouchwa and sentil
I'd like to see them come out of the glass.
I can't believe I'm here right now.
Li Di Bon Kont told me that I was going to buy it.
When you get to the Bò area, you will arrive at home from Bòman, wherever you are.
Malis tonbere and many others.
The men who killed her died.
and kill each other.
Does everyone know, do they police the wine and tell you how much I'm worth?
Why do I have such a soft spot?
They're the ones who've got it all figured out.
I'm going to buy Bouki di.
of men living in the country.
I'm looking forward to seeing you again.
It is the gateway to Bouki's home.
I'll give you two of my children, and I'll give you a valve.
I'm going to tell you.
I've been banned for a while.
I'm going to be quiet and I'm going to be happy.
How do you know what to do when you have a child?
Now that you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got it, you've got
I'm looking forward to seeing the sea.
I'm going to come back and I'm going to go back and I'm going to go back and I'm going to go back and I'm going to go back and I'm going to go back and I'm going to go back and I'm going to go back and I'm going to go back and I'm going to go back and I'm going to go back and I'm going to go back and I'm going to go back and I'm going to go back and I'm going to go back and I'm going to go
and cut off the wind.
There's only one thing you can do.
Koupir caused bef bef tonme, Moyy al pale m jeter and bef li tonge.
It's not like I'm going to be able to keep up with her.
We've got a ton of things going on.
You're the only one who knows.
I've been waiting for you to come up with a plan.
Mwen nou ranchal and bef sa under makak bim bim
I'm a bit of a bummer on the other side.
That's why I'm here.
Open the door to the beef.
I'm looking forward to the next couple of days.
It's up to you to tell me what to do.
They're not going to be able to keep up with them.
I don't know what to do with myself.
They manifested themselves in the tea or li.
I don't know what to do with myself, I don't know what to do with myself, I don't know what to do with myself, I don't know what to do with myself, I don't know what to do with myself, I don't know what to do with myself, I don't know what to do with myself, I don't know what to do with myself, I don't know what to do with myself, I don't know what to do with myself.
Why not?
I don't know what's wrong with you.
Yo bat non bouki yo
There's a lot more to it than that.
They've got a lot to do with it.
I'm going up the stairs.
It's up to you when you're ready.
Li fougetan pou yon tou
They put on the head of the beef and the head of the beef.
It's in the middle of my dimension.
But I'm going to tell you something that I don't like.
They're really good.
From there, I'll tell you what I'm doing wrong, what I'm doing wrong, what I'm doing wrong, what I'm doing wrong, what I'm doing wrong, what I'm doing wrong, what I'm doing wrong, what I'm doing wrong, what I'm doing wrong, what I'm doing wrong, what I'm doing wrong, what I'm doing wrong, what I'm doing wrong, what I'm doing wrong, what I'm doing wrong, what I'm doing wrong, what I'm doing wrong
I don't want to take a man, a demon, or anything I want.
If you're going to make a mistake, you're not going to make a mistake, you're not going to make a mistake, you're not going to make a mistake.
I'm going to bring you two new wines.
I've been waiting for you.
I'm going to tell you a story.
Now you know what I mean.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
Deligwen li mès lalete is also known as deligwen li mès lalete.
They're going to have to take their heads off.
They're not there yet.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
You can't find it.
Mezanmi yo bat ton bouki
I'm sorry to bother you.
I'm sorry to hear that.
I'm going to do something about it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
I'm not sure what to do.
I'm not sure what to do.
I've never had a debate in my life.
I'll have a good day.
I'm going to tell you about my grandmother as a great-grandmother.
I'm so excited and excited about it.
I don't know whether to say yes or no, but I'm not sure.
Or you're not going to get any milk.
I'm not going to talk to you about what you're doing.
I'll tell you why, if I'm going to throw it away, can I offer a new one?
People who want to be in charge of their own affairs do not want to be in charge of their own affairs.
It's a bit of a shock to me.
I'm going to kill a woman if I die.
I can't wait to get back to the band.
Let's get to the bottom of it.
It's the end of it.
They've got the network.
They're going to have to come up with a plan when they're ready.
They're doing it right.
It's a lot of fun to be on the road.
Men, they are men, they can know nothing.
Once they were defeated, they were resurrected.
Let me tell you the story of how you came to be.
It's the size of a box of chocolates.
I'm not sure if it's worth it or not.
Or maybe you'll never see it again.
Or maybe it's just the head.
Or you can do it.
To be ready to be the ruler of men, I will always be in control of the people.
To win, to win, to win, to win.
If I do, I'll get to know the men I know.
I'm not sure I'll ever be able to get you back on your feet.
No one wants to see you do anything.
I'm going to put a stop to it.
M from gals adyon or an pa t pran, or pa t gen ta an gen.
Mwen, who's the genie?
Do you have a single gene?
I'm going to see you there.
I'm going to see you in December and I'm going to see you in December and I'm going to see you in December and I'm going to see you in December and I'm going to see you in December and I'm going to see you in December and I'm going to see you in December and I'm going to see you in December and I'm going to see you in December and I'm going to see you in December and I'm going to see you in December and I'm going to see you in December and I'm going to see
I'm going to touch it.
I've got all the knowledge I need.
sotopri, madado, to search for w, m, m, m, m, m or bayen knowledge.
I knew it before I left to go to my father's house.
I told my dad I'd go to bed in a second if he was the one who died.
Even my mother didn't want me to.
My mother-in-law is in charge.
It is possible to make seven pubs.
Bring them to the vent.
I've been in a lot of trouble, but the commissioner's office isn't there yet.
I'm not going to do anything about it, I'm going to do it with a pen.
I don't care about Morel, I don't care about people like that. Oh, I'm the grandson of a dead wife, my mother's mother's son is dead.
They've got a lot to do with it.
I don't know if it's for me.
Are you the same person?
It's up to you.
There are many people out there who want to help.
I'm the only man who can do that.
Take it or leave it.
I'm here to help you.
They bring all the commissions man nou men
I don't want to eat like that anymore.
In the meantime, people are starting to fertilize their children again.
It's the same size as mine, 18 tons, 18 tons, and it's very small.
I'm not a woman.
And all that I have commanded you to do is always live with you.
I'm going to tell you about ISIS.
to gain an understanding.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you.
Bega de men li.
Bega yon dadab konlrive I have not been since
Fredi and Monnell have a lot of fun.
I'm going to go to Oubay.
M pa gen medikab
There's nothing wrong with that.
What do you mean?
I'm not sure I'm going to make it.
jizkal kouche leve
There should be no talk all over the place.
There is only one monmato to the Jan non Woukran
Congratulations to you for everything you've done.
As soon as you get up, you'll have to push.
I'm here for my big brother and I'm here for you.
If you're a father's son, you're a good father.
We don't have a religion.
who resides on the birthday of my grandmother.
Men le Douza w men le Douza w
He didn't eat his father's birthday.
My dad would know.
They're not the same people.
Bye zanp zab.
If you're a little bit older, you're going to be a little bit older, and you're not going to be able to make a big difference in your life.
If there is a promise in the promise, in the promise, in the promise and in the promise, then there is also a promise in the promise.
The men had been sent to Athens for the first time.
I'm also a child.
I'm the last one to leave.
The gate is open to the public.
The men could have a chance to win.
I'm going to tell you all about it.
Form a simple form that can be used by anyone with a disability.
Mifè with the sankélev sanké
Ban, OK, Grandma, Odi and your father, Odi and your father?
Ban, OK, or someone to ban, sou dyspe, OK, OK, mwen mwen mwen t pale.
Whoever wins or loses, wins or loses, wins or loses.
It's either the chicken or the beef.
It's not about the meat or the beef.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
It's all about the people of Sogyan.
We can't afford to lose weight.
We can't afford to lose weight.
Now you don't have to go to bed.
They're cooking the beef.
I'm here to help you.
I'm with you on this one.
and during the last rache viyenn nan
There is a good chance that they will be in good shape.
Yon bil chochip bwal seems to be different.
It's not like you're going to have a lot of fun with it.
The son of Zabouka toube pi w
I'm the oldest animal in my family.
It's not like I don't know what to do with myself.
The weather has changed dramatically.
Zabouka has followed the steps taken to ensure the effectiveness of the Zabouka pitmen.
tanzan Zabouka pitmen li
You may be wise or you may have something to say to him.
They make me feel like I'm in the middle of someone else's life.
There's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
Brase chodyè a
One of the most important things is to keep in mind that you are a man.
There's no shortage of men here.
I'm not sure what to say.
Vimoujis then came to me and told me to stay away from me.
I can't help but wonder if I'm going to be able to do the same thing.
Kum pa gouti Byann isya avan ankòl toufi chou dyè li
Èdouki toufi chou dyè li
They're back to the drawing board, and they're back to the drawing board.
For Levi's sake, it has become a common practice.
I'm sure you'll be able to find a way to plan for the next couple of days.
What is the gravitational pull of the vein?
Once again, he said, Zaboka sa w ap pale, w ap play, fan Zaboka or ye conde m ap mil guid vin or.
I was born in the Bay of Man.
Or even someone who would ban me from taking a bath.
It's the only way to get people to know you.
They say it's true.
Even if I told you I wouldn't let you go.
It's not like I'm going to be able to get out of the way, but I'm going to be able to get out of the way, and I'm not going to be able to get out of the way again.
They're fine in a big way.
It's like a ball of mouse jinn.
My grandmother's mother died and I'm dying right now.
Now I'm alive and well.
It's like I'm living in Vienna.
The guy who saw me was a monche.
I'm going to taste it and I'm going to eat it in my flanks.
Three or three men take their lives.
I don't know what to say to my daughter.
You're not the smartest person in the world.
I'm going to tell you a story.
Men and men have everything to show for it.
The men were rejected.
It can be used to purify a person's skin.
I'm going to live a new life.
They were placed in front of Zaboka.
Remember a now now
And now we have a new generation of people like Moukè.
The men who took the soup were very happy.
I don't know what I'm going to do, but I'm going to try to make it work.
Piskou bak ap ranm zwo a pou sousi
Alan can also take me here.
You are a good man.
Don't get me started and I can't wait to get back to you.
Kenya's prime minister, I'm going to call you.
I'm really excited about it.
It's a safe place to be.
They took the saffron and put it in the saffron of Eschiele.
They took a code that they could use to save money.
They're taking a look at it.
They take a knife and put it on their backs and they buy a type of knife.
They're going to have to take the soap to get to the bottom of it and make it happen.
I can't get enough of them.
It's also a great way to get to know each other.
I'm not going to lie to you.
On kon konjven bondwon an
This is a man of the people.
I'm going to be a man too.
Monchen or gen may be able to do so for up to three seconds underneath the w.
The key to number b is the three-digit number below w.
They say that I'm going to leave you alone.
That's why I'm here.
I'm looking for a recipe and I'm looking for a recipe.
It's just that I don't know what to do with myself.
Bouki made sure that they could not be overwhelmed with pride.
They're a lot of people.
Bouki is the first person to speak to me.
Bouki is the first person in the world to do so.
It's the same as Bouki's, and it's the same.
Bouki men are not allowed to drive Bouki men out of the house.
For where the chief is, the voice of the clock is heard.
I've been wanting to buy a monsoon.
It's a great way to get to know the monks and their families.
I'm going to tell you something.
There's no such thing as a mountain lion.
I'm sure you'll find a few people who don't want to go up the stairs.
They put the montman on it.
It's like the people who trace it.
They met in a big renyanm
I don't want to be in a club.
I'm going to get rid of this guy.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
Those who bet, take a meal or a bag, eat, drink, drink, or drink.
I don't want to turn my mouth and my tongue into a good tongue.
Put your mouth and your tongue together.
I don't want to go to the farm in Bram.
At the moment, the guy is in such a state of shock.
I'm going to tell you two.
And you can only print one of them in my book.
I can't put my finger on it.
Whoever comes by l.
It's time to take a look at what's going on.
It's time to move on to the next step.
It's like a magic trick for you.
It's not the same as good.
I'm going to ask you if you're going to be able to do it.
Then she ran away.
I can't wait to see what they come up with.
I can't say a word.
It's a good thing my brother has some privileges, but I'm all for it with my brother Midil.
Not my brother's son is completely taken away from me in a matter of days.
The men are from Mali jenvenye typeou gini villal laday.
I'm going to take a break from my job.
I'm not going to lie to you.
There is no such thing as a badge of honor.
Now you know the plan.
I'm going to give you a piece of paper.
You will be able to re-evaluate the quality of life for them.
I'll give you the wine.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
I'm going to have to take a look at some of the things that popped up when I saw them popping up.
I'm going to have a pop-up.
I have spoken with him for thirteen years.
I decided to give it to you.
Because you've taken a drama of your life from the Pope.
They can be read with great enthusiasm.
They say that I am the Pope.
I can't wait to talk to the Pope.
It's the only thing that makes me want to go back to the drawing board.
I'm not sure what to say.
I'm not sure if I'm ready or not.
I've got a cup of coffee.
There is no repair or replacement.
or chiche café a a
You can't go back to your father or grandfather.
Pope or Pope.
Coffee is made during the course of the day.
Coffee is a great way to make your own cup of coffee.
The wine can be sold quickly and quickly as a good coffee.
Let's have a cup of coffee before it's too late.
There may be many of them.
So much so that you can't plant feathers.
Papaya vinyl pran
3 days before you go back to the drawing board.
I can't wait to get out there.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything.
Men who have changed their minds.
I can't wait for them to die.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
Man, man, what is the great record of man's life, what is the great record of man's life?
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it, but I'm going to be able to do it, I'm going to be able to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it
The Lord said to me, "I am with you always, even when you are young, even when you are young, you are beautiful".
Meche, I'm a vispit or I'm going to tell the Lord that he's going to make a great recovery for the people.
I'm going to give you a little more time.
When you have a cup of coffee or wine, you can converge on this beautiful project.
Put the spike of the earth on me and I'll take you for a drink.
You have become a lotan l yo di ou papye vin sou pòt ouvrens
to make him fall alive in legoud.
Now you're going to leave behind me.
Now we're going to leave behind.
I'm here for you.
The man who is vibrating and I am not vibrating and I am not vibrating to do two days of work.
compou tap wap compou tap
I'm going to tell you what's going on here.
Yes, I am a fisherman, or a worker.
And if you're working for me, if you don't know how to do the same thing, I'll do it for you.
K ap bagg
Youdejwen epop shortise the militiyen
K ap baggage is typical of the militiamen
There's nothing you can do to make me feel better.
I'm also going to do something about it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again.
It's a great way to work and be happy.
It's very much a li.
We're not going to be able to do anything.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
It is also beneficial for the w pe.
I cut all the men's shoes.
They've grown up and become men.
They're still there.
I don't want to take people away from me.
If you want to take someone.
Yon gouchon is on the road.
Now the machine is ready for you.
This is the advice of my mother.
You'll be able to dispose of them for up to 60 dollars.
Disputes about how they know I'm not going to ask you any questions.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again.
They can no longer be used.
It's not the same as tea.
How do you get your money's worth?
What do you think of them?
If you are going to be a woman or anman mwen anmen mwen for yyouyouyou
What's the recipe again?
Donk, not Tilyachal, otherwise you won't be able to do anything about it.
Now that you know how to use it, you'll be able to use it again.
Take, for example, the case of Benin.
I can't wait to get to know someone.
For example, if you want to know what's going on in Brazil and what's going on in the world, you can do it.
Don't fall asleep or live.
It's all about the people.
In the meantime, make sure you're up or down, as long as you're on your own.
The pillar of the mountain to the big one.
Stand up, student, for example, where are you?
If I had two full-sized beers, what would I do with my coat?
There are two mountains and it's like a mountain.
or pa t mrive
I don't live on the coast.
The size of the net is a
Or it could be the same as the epiphany.
or on a bay of water.
We're going up the hill and we're going up the hill.
I'm on my way.
It's either that or that kind of thing.
One of them is the one who's got it all figured out.
Or someone who would only play.
I'm not going to let you down.
Or wherever you are.
I don't want to wear a dress like that in my garden.
That's how you win.
For example, if you have a passion for mountaineering, you can go to the mountains.
For one of the men in the chain.
For example, I was on the road when you and I were devils.
The road that leads to the top of the mountain.
Dock for the swivanchin in the chape.
I don't think I'm going to be able to keep up with it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
This is where you want to be.
It's the same or the same at the end of the day.
Everything from where I came from to where I came from.
Mwen bay ik zanp kon nou bagayi
Better than Atriyann dan li or men we do now people Pawò if the pli fall or t ap merle
I've been waiting for you too.
Good luck with the tea.
I don't want to call another Jan again.
I don't know what else to do.
It's not just you.
There's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
I don't know what to do with myself.
It is located on the slopes of the new mountain in the vicinity of the river.
We're running away from you.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not, but I'm going to make it.
They're fighting for their lives.
How do you know what's going on?
After the savanna, what's left of it?
People who don't know how to climb a mountain if they don't want to climb a plavi, they don't like it.
Let me know what you're up to.
Once I've been through it all, I've been through it all.
Yo pa de plase
I don't know what to do about it.
La anbou konwouti is also known as La anbou konwouti.
The women said to them, "Let's go".
It's a woman's right to know.
If the woman is in the water, she is in the water.
I can't wait to see it.
The water is soaked in water, and the water is soaked in water.
You're a woman.
Or a bunch of things to get out of the way.
What is the order of when the lap comes out?
How do you know when you're going to die?
It's not my fault.
My friends are coming.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it or not.
You've got a lot to learn about.
If you don't, or if you don't, you're not going to be able to do it.
I'm at the end of it.
What is it like to have a seed that comes out of the ground?
Pan rennen wou pa esanp t avan yon blo as siltat sotit soutè ton monn so
They're on their way.
I'm on my way.
I'm so tired of this, I'm on my way.
You can enter the parish or you can do it.
I'm not going to run for office.
If you can't find anything for someone else, for example, there's water for someone else, there's a problem.
Take, for example, water.
A cup of coffee with water.
Two hours later, I fell asleep.
The water of the vineyards is still there.
As long as I'm here, I'm here.
When a man falls from a river to a river, he falls.
I fell asleep.
I'm going to tell you.
Li toube Kouwè lamè a
The men are on their way home.
men or two amphibians.
There's a lot to do with everything, including the powder.
It's not like I'm a man.
I'm not sure where to start.
It's not like I'm going to be able to make a living off of it.
I don't know what happens when I fall.
When I fall down like everything else,
The men and the women of the town are very friendly.
They've been eating it for a while.
I'm going to tell you a story about a young man's life.
It's not like we're going to be able to do this or that.
Yo anle tout blanc let
or gen dwa put radou in it
I'm going to wash it.
They don't eat anything and they don't eat anything.
We can't wait to see if it's on the air or on cable.
This is especially true in the case of consular vessels.
You're in the middle of a ravine so that when a ladder falls or falls, you can't even stand it.
What do you mean by fear, or fear?
It's not easy to do this.
As a result of this, I have to stand up and be counted.
Don't do it or don't stop there.
They can ride a ton of them.
There's a lot more to it than that.
It's not what you're looking for.
It's not a relay.
I'm going to pass?
Okay, I'm going to have a cup of coffee.
And when you're not there, you're in the middle of it.
Whether it's a man or a woman.
The men were able to find a place to live.
I'm going to do everything I can to make people happy.
The people who are ab ankspef wal benyen
I have prepared everything expressly for you to know.
How do you know who they are?
I'm going to tell you something, or I'm going to tell you something, or I'm going to tell you something, or I'm going to tell you something, or I'm going to tell you something, or I'm going to tell you something, or I'm going to tell you something, or I'm going to tell you something, or I'm going to tell you something, or I'm going to tell you something, or I'm going to tell you something, or I'm going to tell you something.
If you ask me, can I help you?
If you're wondering who you are, please.
Who's that guy?
Koup d'ap cheche yon moun
I'm sure you'll find someone.
You will continue to climb the mountain.
It's been a long time coming.
Peter w mann nou
It is taken by izab.
Fin mwen monte
It's a great way to get to know a good man.
I'm going somewhere else again.
I can't wait to see what you're up to.
I don't want to let women know that they're still up there.
Women continue to climb all the time.
It's always been that way.
It's the end of the mountain.
Or at least turn it off or turn it off.
Or what's going to happen next?
For the first time ever, you know.
I can't wait to see what you're up to.
I can't wait to get started.
I can't wait to get to the beach.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do next.
To the end of the day, I'm going to give you the best you can.
I'm going to go back to the conventional form, and I'm going to go back to the conventional form.
Still, I don't look at the world, not always.
Mwen t ap machan san mavo eti as on di li
They're really good at it.
They're not going to be able to do it.
I'm getting ahead of myself.
If you want to talk about it, you can do it.
It's not like I'm a wolf.
I can't wait to hear it.
I know I'm late.
Now we're going to have to do something about it for a year.
Pijan mwen we w w
It can be worn with a sleeve.
I asked him about his education.
Now we're on the road.
It's all or nothing when people come out of it.
That's the way I feel about it.
I'm going to tell you the truth.
Peter was a man of many talents, a man of many talents, and a man of many talents.
If it's a big deal, I'm not going to let it get to you.
I don't know if you'll ever know that again.
It's the same as an anchor.
An ankon sign is an ankon tis
Anen gen ankon
It's not like I'm going to die.
I know you very well.
We know the signs of the Ankon.
for me or for you.
Or party or take or take someone else's death for you.
I want to know where I am, how is it?
So much for a new person or a new person.
Can't wait to see what you're up to now.
What can you do?
In the car, there are no cars.
One more mannimon, or two squads on the other side of your base?
How do you get off this car?
Get in front of me.
The machine is based on a
Or like high school
The consonant or consonant is the opposite of the consonant.
It's not like it's going to happen again.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
Oltare Seyou a?
If a person doesn't drink or gout, they're going to get sick.
Either it's a cylinder, or it's a good one, and many of them are wet, so they're fine.
Whether they're on the ground or not, they don't know.
I don't know what they're talking about.
Or the way you live.
I'm going to go with you.
Or go on the road again.
Or do something like that.
Se la men dwan.
La men dwan.
If I do this or that, one of us will live for the rest of our lives.
When I get out of here, I'm going to have to work together.
Vin la plason.
I have a lot of respect for you, anyway.
And if you don't tell me, you're not going to see me, I'm not going to see you, I'm going to watch you.
I wondered if I knew who was going to be there and who was going to be there.
Wap is a concert.
Men, here we are.
Men, thank you very much, when it's too late, you know m, pa la or again.
I've been doing a lot of work on this and I've been thinking about it.
There is a war going on for too long.
The angel came to her again.
I'm going to answer my titriyon for a tea.
It can also be used by men.
My lips again
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
I want to be able to have everyone in Sabanm so that anyone who climbs the Dere can die.
Can't wait to see you again.
Do you want to take it?
Vajizanm, Sun Gayib, Vajizanm and Pijon Karadi are the people.
It's time to go to bed, and the next thing you know, it's time to go to bed, and the next thing you know, it's time to start a new life.
The elephant, the sun, the mountain, and the sun are from God.
If you don't, you can't or won't do anything for me.
O m santi Chalè ay san only m gadi
I'm sure you've heard of me.
I'm sorry, but I'm not sure what to do.
Now I can help you with that and I can help you with that as we take pictures of you.
Lanmway, like the sun setting on the outside, you can go like a daepé dounba, or pa mwen anye, pop sa y nou, to yon on the outside.
When the sun goes down, the sun goes down, and the sun goes down, people walk.
A generation of people who don't know how to walk through it.
There is no time for anyone to walk.
They may be able to cast a ballot.
It's only a matter of time.
I don't know if I'm going to make it big.
When someone wakes up and puts everyone in bed,
I'm here to help you get the job done.
Bonen's video can make you feel good about yourself.
I'll take the video even if it falls off.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it through the day.
Bon tiglo k ap lave piye or granmate lè w leve Bonen
I'm going to look at the tiger again.
The titou le la pi will fall like this.
I can't wait to see what happens next.
The sky is the same.
from heaven to heaven.
You can't have a baby like that.
I'm a brother and sister in the sunshine.
I'm so tired of being in the sun.
I know what the sun is like.
If you don't know someone else or you know someone else.
Or even as k ap ap rete konsan se too lessa
Anpou or kadeye or two l' faire y
It's not like I'm going to be able to see the sun or anything like that.
and a new one, David.
You're going to have to deal with a lot of different things, and you're going to have to deal with a lot of different things.
There's so much more to it than that.
Li li jan katans lin
They don't know what they're talking about.
Come with me.
I'm going to say it again.
Konn de anken
I'm very familiar with the larval tooth.
I'm going to France.
or gene lippe
Donken or di mounkoun in pi t is a lalin
It has been used since antiquity.
Tooth decay or tooth decay.
It's my poem.
Alalim pati, anmontani, li pronikati, man whose time will be for the fullm or the three days before the fullm, your fullm nan listen.
Three days later.
Aprè kasank lin ap down
I'm going to tell you about my dad.
The attorney-at-law is also responsible for the investigation.
If you can't plant a plant that's not there, you can't.
or t ap bezon
Ananmejou pou nou and jan libase.
It's the same person.
Planting a plant is not the only way to get ahead.
I can't wait to see what you come up with.
After you've forgotten, use your apprenticeship.
or continue again
I forgot about it again.
It's not like that.
I'm really looking forward to the next one.
Or know we're ahead of the curve.
I'm still here and I'm still here.
We're always on the lookout for you when you're ready.
After you've had enough, you'll be fine.
To begin with, we have to make sure that we are ready to start a new life.
There are many ways in which people can make a difference.
You've got a lot to say.
Whether you want to party or leave, leave or do the same.
Am I going to go to Egypt?
Do you know that there are other animals that love you?
It's not too late.
Am I going to tell you everything?
Could I have asked for everything?
It's time to say goodbye.
Hair swap tonics can be used.
Let's move on to the next step.
It's not even close.
What do you think about it?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
It's the same size.
Kiss on kon or wè tou yo eee gontan
There are two stages in the development phase.
It's a good idea to get started.
We can't be alone.
My face is brown.
Se lapli, flour or two sauces or two lapli, san sò or kawabò two lamens.
Then, they say van, they're going to have a car or two and they're going to have pancakes and they're going to be there.
I'm sorry, but I've been here a long time.
Gon trennen o n ap still continue in the autumn.
Even now, we are continuing to do so.
You're not even going to be able to get to the men's side of the bay.
I've been waiting for you to tell me what you're doing.
It's not like I've been there before.
You're not even going to be able to get up.
It's all over the place.
When you fall or fall, you fall or fall.
It's not over yet.
Is everything new to me and it's all new to me?
Who's the new white man?
Now that you've got it, baby.
I'm not sure if this is the case with Konnan van apre.
There is no price tag.
Now that we're here, we're here.
There are ten factors that contribute to maintaining a healthy balance.
Kip da, who knows the county?
I'm sure you'll find it necessary to make sure that you're on the right track.
It's the only way to get to know each other.
They are only fans of those convicted of murder.
It's the only way to get to know each other.
Where do you start with your mother?
It's the first time I've seen it.
It's the first time I've seen it.
Or you can walk comfortably and comfortably.
I don't have anything to say to each of them.
I've been waiting for you to know what I'm talking about.
I'm falling down the stairs.
Swal boule néfòt pi for the citron sunkali boule
They're going to be reborn.
I'd do more to know where I'd be if I didn't have one.
I don't know if anyone has ever told me that.
Now that Eve is dead, she has to go back to her mother's place.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
And I'm not going to lie to you.
I've been waiting for you to announce it.
I've been through it.
De blan voye li, you say.
I can't wait to hear about it again.
Anan yon forti pou y ap kale nou.
I've got a couple of new ones.
I'd like to know if you're going to be able to get the kebabon, right?
You don't have to worry about spinach.
The gen cyclode is here.
Pi jan wakond teeth are not to be removed, men.
Men, what are you doing?
m apri sa a.
Kisou nou bay lapli
Li konn vizak bay lapli
Ankon li tou konn tooth pale
It's also important to know how to listen to people when they're talking to you.
M pa l'ange tou li, ankon li, say only one person, li.
It's all about the ball.
Everyone should know everything about the council.
Everything you need to know about ballet.
I'm going to tell you something.
It's a good idea to buy a bonnet.
It's like a bonnet and it doesn't work.
M ap Konda, who's on the other side, do you know who's on the other side?
No, and I'm going to heaven.
Is it the same with money or money?
If you don't have a credit card, most of you don't have a credit card, and you don't have money, money, or possessions.
What about money or money?
It's going to be a little bit of fun.
It's the same Bonnet.
I'll see you again.
Yon debay and make n base
It's like falling apart and falling apart.
or pa kab chita
Anlankan an lann
Or the ball of the lips of ankan
a consultant for a specific purpose.
If I can't fall, I can't be myself.
On the way fay zanp laplizyen tonmi, or do you want me to do this?
Wante nou kay.
You are not allowed to enter the consonant under sanje or parè.
They say it's a good idea.
It's a bit of a shock to me, but it's a little bit of a shock to me.
I can't wait to see who you are.
Or something you don't want to do anytime soon.
Or they won't do the same thing.
I'm going to try to make it up to you.
Bonn was eleven years old at the time.
This is especially true when it comes to people's tones.
I know I'm coming.
I'm going to call them.
Here's what's going on.
You know I know who you are.
Or, as if he were on a manla dimen yon dounan
It's not like they're going to be able to keep up with what's going on.
We don't need to do as much as we can or don't need to.
Then, there is the opportunity to sit down and enjoy the comfort of your own home.
Ban my people's illness
I've been thinking about other things, and I've been thinking about other things.
They made me want you.
Or, to hear something else, to hear something else, to hear something else.
One twoupaj and one syurè
One of the reasons is that you're not going to be able to do it.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do what I want to do.
Now, do you have a TV set where you can see and talk to your new friends?
Do you know what you can do, what you can do, what you can do, what you can do, what you can do, what you can do, what you can do, what you can do, what you can do, what you can do, what you can do, what you can do?
I, li depou take you in Serè an mouy.
What do you think of Serè an mouy?
Mouy, mouy, sou takòkey w pran nou lan, a ap oufè.
In the meantime, would you like to tap into it?
Ever since we met, we've been dating men, haven't we?
It's hard to believe that you've lost a lot of people in your life.
De zanm, how many times have I met his wife?
How many times do I have to pay?
Before you know it, how can I help you?
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do, what I'm going to do
It's been a while since I've seen it.
We're not here right now.
I'm going to bed.
There are two ways to do this.
They can be accompanied by humans or sunlight.
Or to accompany me on your journey to the end.
It's never too late.
It's always been a good idea.
It's been a long day, and it's been a long day, and it's been a long day, and it's been a long day.
If the day comes, I am here, I am here, I am eating, I am going to Daou, sektab, utob, apre utob, nou, you are going to pran?
I'm going to go.
They are also taken.
That's what I'm saying.
I'm not going to take it anymore.
I'm not a man.
If I sell, if I can't afford it, if I can't afford it, if I can afford it, if I can afford it.
No, have you seen a lawyer?
Zanbou's sezan is on the way.
This is the birthday of my son Wdi Wye
Grand Moun Bonjou Raya is said to be the king's son.
It's a great feeling to be here at Ankon.
All the people who live in the country have a right to a fair trial.
I'm in a state of shock.
I'm with you pliz and anne
I'm here for you.
I've been there before.
I'm the only one.
sote or la rizom
I'm here for you.
I'm not sure what's going on.
I don't know who you are.
I know people, but especially I'm still trying to get more out of it.
Especially when it comes to me.
It's not even about ZANPAPRI.
Madrid and so they know how to celebrate the festival.
They're tired of it.
How do you know what to do with it?
Sa nou mann nou konn moun genmèv to a derivative of the same as the French language.
Someone upstairs to carry the luggage.
You're going to have to walk in front of me.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
Once again, they've banned each other.
I don't know what to do with myself.
We don't know what we're going to do.
It's also open to the public.
Even the leg of an abbreviation is the same as the leg of an abbreviation.
Dad, I'm with you, Dad, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you.
The first day of the first week of November.
It's the birthday of everyone.
It's the first day of the month of November.
It's a German holiday.
Milk, milk and cream, and grains of wheat flour, January, may also be used.
And then there's the letter anman
I don't know who or what I'm going to call home.
Or write to the person as the same person or to the same person as the same person.
If you can live together for two years, I'm going to have a baby.
Or say I'm in a good mood or I'm in a bad mood or I'm in a bad mood.
Such as forb mou to pass Kilè or kabab
My grandmother told me.
You can't give a basic idea of what you're getting yourself into or what you're getting yourself into.
It's up to you who can win.
I'm not sure if it's the same card or not.
Or that's like la.
Looking forward to it.
Is there anything I can get out of my car that I can't eat?
I'm not the only one who's been there.
One needs to know if we are going to be men.
It's not like you're 11 years old.
It's the only way to get people to do it.
I'm not sure how much I'm going to pay for it.
I'm not going to lie to you.
When I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it, I talk about it,
De leve myself
You're not going to be able to keep up with what's going on.
It's been a while since I've spoken to you now.
I'm talking about your husband.
Or for ever, ever, ever, ever, ever.
The components of human beings are born with the knowledge and the knowledge of God.
They were born in the same way as men of alivi nou dat in the same way as men of distant origin.
It's been a long time coming.
They've been around since I was born.
I'm going to have to go back to the drawing board.
The men were imprisoned by the president.
That's when I was born.
I'm in the middle of it.
I've always wanted to do something like chak jou or always do something like that.
I'm going to do the right thing.
I'm so excited to be able to do something like this.
It's not just me, it's me, it's you.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
Even if you don't know what you're doing, you're not going to be able to do it until you've done it.
Who are you?
If you're going to be at home, you're not going to be at home.
I'm going to fight for my life and I'm going to fight for my life.
So, the edition is not a deposit, but it's a lot of money.
Okay, in those days, but in the future, would you say, if you knew how to use diesel?
Ap boun to the man of the match.
What happened or what happened?
There are many people who don't want to be on the phone.
I'm going to eat it.
I don't want to be in a relationship with you anymore.
It's the end of an era.
When you say a word or a word, you don't want to say a word or a thing.
Sout an accident vagajay a
You can have new wine in your canton.
How do I get to know people?
What happens when I'm banned?
Pi talè m an accident, pi, siè example yo metan w moun, mwen an prisan w example.
I'm going to try to get my hands on it.
The tonkilè w can di di
How can we do this?
If you do, you'll end up in jail.
Such as da ou te vinmyè or jann men your chair sa a la
ejodi yo w winen or jann men.
I'm here, everything has a sound in it.
So, if you're going to tell your boss, you're going to have to sit down.
What's the big deal?
Mip, g ap chief chief chief chief chief chief sa.
Okay, I'm going to talk to you today, okay?
If you're going to make it, they'll come to you tomorrow.
That's what I'm talking about right now.
If I could tell you a gap today, where would I be?
Today, I'm going to have to do something about it.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm going to try the other day.
I'm going to talk to you about today.
What do you think I'm going to do?
As in other parts of the country and other areas of Konkon.
I'm going to tell you a story or two.
How do you know when you're going to get there?
There are many such as or pap arrive jou a, sena ap arrive kijon wap di, san denmen.
Jodi apsan and you
Don't be fooled by this.
I'm not sure what to do with it.
The prophecy was also fulfilled in Silesian times.
I will be going to the bathroom.
The leverage is also there.
It's the first time I've seen it.
If you don't want to go back to the old one, you can go back to the old one.
The other side is behind an ap two pills l ap di
A pair of shoes on the back.
You're born behind the scenes and you've seen it.
I'm going to get out of here.
It's just in time for Christmas.
If you're going to be a kid, you're going to have to finish.
You're going to have to put on new clothes.
I'll tell you what I mean.
That's why I'm here.
I'm sure you've seen it before.
They don't know what they're talking about.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make the decision.
There is no such thing as "existent" and there is no such thing as "existent".
I don't know what to do with myself.
That's why I'm here.
I can't wait to get to the next one.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
As a matter of fact, I'm working.
Someone needs to know how to do the work.
This is the first time I've heard of the eclipse.
I was attacked.
Whether it's short or short, how do I get it to work?
Do I have to go to the office, how does it work?
How does it work?
We don't know who they are.
I've just arrived, where are you when you get to work for the first time, how are you?
I've got a new job.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to help anyone.
The first commision traval a mò
It's not about the people.
It's not just me, it's people.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
If you ask a good question, or if you ask a good question, or if you ask a good question, or if you ask a good question, or if you want to ask a good question, or if you want to ask a good question, or if you want to ask a good question, or if you want to ask a good question, or if you want to ask a good question, or if you want to ask a good question, or if you want to ask a good question, or if you want to ask a good question, or if you want to ask a question, or if you want to ask
Manvri m mande or pa exzanm
Where am I or where will I come from?
Do you know how many times I've been there, or how many times I've been there, and how many times I've been there?
I don't know what to do with myself, but I know what to do with myself.
In addition to the bonus, there is no limit to the number of items that can be purchased.
Is there a man like you who would do such a thing to live in vain?
Well, is it possible for Nichis to do it in one day or one day?
The tape was made.
I'm going to take someone to the party.
They're retreating and retreating.
If you can't do it now, you can do it now.
Do you think the children of today already have a chance to repanm yo Nan yo?
Now it's up to you.
You know the new ventran.
I'm with you on this one.
Gen bon yon, is that a kouba sa?
If you ask me a question, who knows?
They also have demensite potik
Yo bon mounès yo
They've only got one mouth.
Man, I have two children to spend in, and you have a great ride.
I feel like I'm too fat.
I'm going to go through the door.
I'm going to tell you something about Simon.
I can't tell you how many members there are who have been infected with this disease so I can't tell you how many.
There's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
Let's get to know each other and see each other as soon as possible.
How do you know who you are?
A person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person
Yon likout Men men pi
You can't call someone who's behind you.
A grown-up can see his or her child's eyes when he or she is getting older.
Germany is on the verge of collapse.
Don't be afraid of people like you.
They are also very short.
Together, we have a lot of fun.
They may or may not be able to do so, for example.
They don't even know what they're doing.
Let's get to know them.
They're here, they're here for you.
Li mens, nou fi, and is a man by the face.
On the other hand, there are many examples of this phenomenon, such as Kizak.
Yon mounzay la
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it through the next few weeks.
All the men in the room were running away.
Who's the one who's been doing this kind of thing?
Parisian cuisine has become so popular in Greece that it has become one of the most popular dishes in the world.
I made a man who wouldn't walk like that with a penny.
I'm going to go with you.
When a man has created a creature, he has to do it.
If you want to learn how to create something, you can do it.
It's not like I'm the only one who's got a nice man.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
I'm not a fan of anything but men.
They've got a network of them.
It's all in your head.
I'll tell you what.
I'm going to call Meg.
Macholp has two bombs.
I'm going to have to go to heaven.
There are many ways to help those who have lost their lives.
I'm going to tell you about the people who bought it for you.
I'm not sure what to say.
I've never heard of you and I've never heard of you before.
I've got a lot of people who want to be with me, and I've got a lot of people who want to be with me, and I've got a lot of people who want to be with me, and I've got a lot of people who want to be with me, and I've got a lot of people who want to be with me, and I've got a lot of people who want to be with me, and I've got a lot of people who want to be with me, and I've got a lot of people who want to be with me
You're the one who's here now.
What do you think they're going to do?
Kouwè, m, m, m, kisa yo konn di an, e de smile yo moun, anfè y jouda.
I can't help myself.
There is only one man and now there is a condition in memory of a member.
One day before me.
The episè w kapabè di de bouchou nou bay dan.
bouch or mare
I can't tell you what to do or what not to do.
Bukk or kale
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm not sure who I'm talking about.
It is a powdered form.
And we can't stop it from happening.
Lidan bout and one more person
Soap and soap again
It's not like a man's heart is broken when he's with you.
K ap li di Dakabrit lanmèl
And then there's the feeling.
What can you do to save someone?
It's not like I'm going to see anyone again, Chevel Nwa.
There is no such thing as Chevel Wouj.
So I know I'm here again and I'm here to help.
My grandmother's name is Tèt Ligèt Granm
I'm on my way and I'm on my way.
It's not like they don't know what they're talking about.
I feel sorry for you.
So I'll know it again
You're not big enough.
You're going to be fine.
Anki Sa yo know li again
You're going to change your mind.
You are welcome.
I'll give you a reason to eat.
You'll find out how it affects you.
You're going to try it.
How do I know when I'm back?
It's the same passion that drives the horse.
It's the same passion.
I'm not sure what you're talking about.
I don't want anyone to walk again.
It's not just about the people.
Walk behind people, walk behind people again, so that no one can walk, walk away.
A generation of people who have walked a good path.
How to write?
The key is to release it.
They are a source of men.
The people were released.
You're going to walk a man.
Sawèy men
It's a party of people.
How do you know men?
Zewèy men too
It's all about men and women.
What's the big deal, what's the big deal?
Don't you ever know?
Pa de jiva
How do you feel about it?
Two, two, three, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, four,
Blan, Jimon, if against the ban on coastal animals, the exanm all falls, the kiswa di ki fall?
If you can't do the same thing, how can you do it?
To the other side of the fence again, where is the fence?
When I open my mouth again, when I open my mouth again, when I open my mouth again, when I open my mouth again, when I open my mouth again, when I open my mouth again, when I open my mouth again, when I open my mouth again, when I open my mouth again, when I open my mouth again, when I open my mouth again, when I open my mouth again, when I open my mouth again, when I open my mouth again, when I open my mouth again, when I open my mouth again, when I open my mouth again, when I open my mouth again,
Yo-yo, like if Jil does this, Jil an relje sa.
Just do it like that, just do it.
I'm going to have to pay for it, but I don't care.
There's also a salt cellar.
I'm not the only one who's been there.
Even in the midst of the storm, he will bring me back to life.
And the road to hell is paved with good intentions.
I've got my own hair.
Tandan or an tandan.
On top of the coast.
as if they were eating.
Well, if you're going to put your hair on my lipstick, you know how good, how good, how good you're going to put your hair on your lipstick, how can you get rid of it?
And then there were seven people who were going to be there.
It's all in your head.
San Patrese has a garage and a two-way street and a retirement home.
You can't do that with your hair and your hair.
We are the ones who were born to do this.
One of the bank's main objectives is to make sure that the bank is fully operational.
I know I can't wash my head.
I'm sure you'll be able to get some help.
I'm not sure what to do with myself.
Ken yon rennen bay as a one k ap.
If you're not familiar with Chaplè, why are you here?
I don't know if I'm going to make it.
I don't know what I'm going to do when I retire, but I'm not going back.
regle sa k ap, regle men all of you, without hair, all of you without hair and not even your hair.
On the big series of people yo like la tention no yo yo on the cold as well as a
As much as 200 years ago, I knew it was time to move on.
I came from a big family.
I've been waiting for you guys.
How do you know who I am?
Come on, man, I'm going to cook, I'm going to be a motherfucking motherfucker.
What do you think, how do you get your hair back?
Cheve Wouj, are you going to the candle of Dabjè anka?
They're going to candle you to Cheve Cannell, no.
Do you know about Cheve Kannell?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
Do you know the answer?
What color hair is Cheve or con dandelion?
Cheve Nwa, Cheve Blanch, Eri.
Cheve Cheve Wouj
It's also a great way to get to know your people.
It's all about the paperwork.
I was all blonde.
That's the way it's supposed to be.
Mouch Tach and Mouch Tach
You can't do that.
You don't know how to do it.
There are two types of machinery.
If you're from another country, go ahead, even if you don't want to be with someone else.
It's just as bad as I thought it was going to be.
How long will it take to have a baby or a baby?
If you don't know how to use it, even if you don't know how to use it, you can't use it.
If there is a new person to look at the face of a person like this, then there is a new person.
There is no such thing as an asylum seeker.
You've got a lot of people who don't know anything about you.
Who knows what I'm talking about?
Who knows what's going on?
It's all about the button.
Who's going to make you pay for it, how are you going to make it?
Men, now only now, anman.
Or I'll wait for two more concerts, and I won't be able to do it again, because I'm going to eat my card.
The road is paved with two piwouj
Puyouj or tandan ta as we are living in my alaghen
I'm two years old.
Menmen even two piwouj
Who are you and who are you?
such as m blan.
If you don't like it, you don't have to wear it, you don't have to wear it, you don't have to wear it, you don't have to wear it, you don't have to wear it, you don't have to wear it, you don't have to wear it, you don't have to wear it, you don't have to wear it, you don't have to wear it, you don't have to wear it, you don't have to wear it, you don't have to wear it.
If you don't have the means to do it, you don't know what you're doing, you don't know what you're doing.
The man who made you know what to do with your hands, the balloon you are carrying.
Or maybe he didn't know he was crying.
Or, if you have a seat like this, or if you don't have a seat like that, what's the big deal?
That's what I'm talking about.
If so, send the men back.
I'm going to tell you about w...
Tankoud la loi I can make men like this, Tankoud la a, se gras sa a Jou en ti pie, with your ponyette.
It's in my pocket.
It's only man bayen.
What's the matter with you, John?
It's only man bayen.
Let's take a look, what is it?
Let's take a look at what happened, why, how did it happen?
It's the only way to get to my fingertips.
The people who hear you sing your song.
Or do you know what you're thinking?
It's my mother's fault.
It's hard to say what we can do.
It's been a while since I've evolved.
I'm not going to let you down.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to keep up with them.
That's how they got there.
I don't know any more.
I don't know anyone else anymore.
It's not uncommon for them to know.
I'm very happy with it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
There's a lot of other things going on here again.
I don't know what to do with myself.
The tears are not the same.
win men's relay with each other.
It's not the same as t non.
I don't know if there's anything new.
I've been reading them.
How do you know who you are and what you're going to say?
If you want to be a man, you have to be a man, you have to be a man, you have to be a man, you have to be a man, you have to be a man, you have to be a man, you have to be a man, you have to be a man, you have to be a man, you have to be a man, you have to be a man, you have to be a man, you have to be a man, you have to be a man, you have to be a man, you have to be a man.
It's all part of my well-being.
No, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me, everything is me,
If you're in a room, you're in a room, you're in a room, you're in a room, you're in a room, you're in a room, you're in a room, you're in a room, you're in a room, you're in a room, you're in a room, you're in a room, you're in a room, you're in a room, you're in a room, you're in a room, you're in a room, you're in a room
The head of the person behind the back of the head.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
I'm going to tell you about it.
They're going to have a lot of fun.
It's a great way to get a feel for yourself.
You're on your own.
I'm going to tell you a good one.
I'm not sure what to do with it.
This is not a bout mwen.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do this without you.
If the form K applies to the form K, then the form K applies to the form K.
That's why I'm here.
Fin desond ma
There's also a cookie for men.
I have met demenn ma
It's not about you or me.
I have met my demenn
I've met some of them before.
They're just a bunch of people.
I'm with you.
Who are you?
I'm sorry, what am I supposed to do?
I'm going to use it or I'm going to throw it away.
It's a good one.
How many new ones are there in Boudamoun?
Why, then, should I pass among us, and come down to him, and say to him, Crispus, and come down to me?
Rel do me.
It's the Lord's doing, and it's all about the people, not the people.
Behind me.
Dwa t gouman an man, okemen la, pote okemen la.
Nan fouk li.
How do I know who I am?
Well, either finmanj or a aiziyon pou ou deyè, or santi, or need snow sa k la Bondeyò, soda or al fè la.
I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here.
It's not like we're going to be able to do it all again.
I'm going to do something about it.
I know what I'm talking about.
Whether or not you're an animal, you'll be able to get rid of them if you don't know.
How are you?
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
Get up and move on to the next thing you know.
w ap pi se
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
A man's desire for water and a drink can be overwhelming.
It's your teeth.
Man is born.
They're great people and they're not the same person or counting people.
They're the greatest people they've ever won.
There's no such thing as a big man.
It's not the same as it was in the old days.
What kind of vessel?
There's no other place to go again.
It's time for you to go back to the drawing board.
I'm going to tell you a story about me.
You know what I'm talking about.
And then there's the release of the album.
I'm going to code for the baby.
The boys are releasing the song.
It's for the kids.
That's why I'm here.
I'm going back again to Non Li bay so I know the same place I'm going to be.
It's time to get back to work.
Before you know it, the person who can win is the person who can win.
It's not like I don't have the love of my life.
There are two types of men.
Donkè Kisa kon plase krèn nè
Others are completely different.
What are you doing?
How do you know when I'm going to call you?
Thank you for your support, I'm sorry, but is there so much going on?
I learned everything already.
Or will it be as if it were born on a true day?
Or are you still here?
Or they will go back to school.
or take a ticket or a ticket.
Okay, thank you Davans.
When the flood is over, there is nothing wrong with that, and it's just a matter of time.
He could say Oh!
What do I do with it, and what do I do with it?
I'm going to pass, I'm going to leave.
The people here, and I do as if it were on my shoulders, and that's why I'm here.
To those who know I'm not the only one, I'm the only one who knows I'm the only one who can do this.
That's what I'm going to do with these people.
And so, w ap stele, se gaen.
It's like I know you won the ratal antou a la
I don't know if I'll ever be able to do anything like that.
It's just that there's so much more to it than meets the eye.
That's why I'm doing this.
W ap siveyil.
I know who I am, so if you don't like it, you'll have to choose between them.
It's not that you don't want to hear about it anymore, Soud.
I'm going to debate the issue, and I'm going to answer the question.
Pa pa, what's the big deal about who's who?
Or who is in charge, who is in charge, who is in charge?
If only they were, you'd know they're both fine, wouldn't you?
I want to be able to relate to people who are all over the place.
I'm going to tell you a story.
I'm going to tell you a story.
Are there still things I can talk about?
People don't talk much about it.
Men, or not good for men who do it all?
Where do I go from here?
I think they're worth more than that.
The teeth are the same.
There's a lot more to it than that.
There are three types of kingship.
I'm going to be pale.
Yo great se debay yo pral pale
I'm not going to let you down.
I'm glad you're here, man, and you're too late for that.
Blage can be a pain, especially when someone knows it.
Mary is the only one who knows what to do.
It's a great way to get involved in the fight against racism and xenophobia.
Some of the people in front of the assembly stood in front of them.
It's the only thing I can tell you.
I speak like a lap di, if lap di pa pa la tat, yo pou li pa pa pa pa pa pa tat, know k ap ap in front of li.
One person said a, another said a.
I've always wanted to be a dentist.
It's hard to tell when someone's going to get there.
I'm looking forward to it.
I can't wait to get to know these people.
I know my teeth.
Dock pa ekvanp or kapab
These are the people who will be able to do a series of things to enter the sanctuary.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do anything like this.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
Whoever is able to do so will always be able to do what he wants.
Eben, mother, mother, I'm going to walk, I'm going to follow your orders.
If it is because you are new, it is as if you are such a person.
A, m ap jizanmi, w ap difè respèce wa, if someone stout to respite me too.
Men don't know what else to do with a man like that.
I'm ready to show you where I want to be.
I've got a lot of friends who have wine with me, including metaphysical friends, because I respect them.
If you don't know what I'm talking about, then what am I talking about?
But only, we're in a three-way tie.
I mean, they know what they're talking about, right?
I'm not going to be able to talk to people like you, but I'm going to be able to talk to people like you.
Kijan renimo or sa yo.
Moun, or do I not come?
Then, magou n hear sa.
Who's going to talk about what they're doing?
People who don't know what they're talking about.
When a ruler appears.
There's no sign of anything going on anymore as to who you're doing it for.
The people of Konnabou or Konndou are not allowed to go to the palace.
In addition to the day or the day, people in radon are depending on the country of origin.
It's not my thing or anything.
I'm not sure if it's true.
Or not counting l...
or by conjuman
It's either me or you.
Or a seizure of or camp against these people.
There is a new kind of place to be found in the countryside.
Or say or do something new.
You're not happy.
If it is true that there is nothing to do, what or who can do it or not?
I'm not confused.
I'm going to the concert to tell you how to do it alone.
It's not like I'm going to do it or even make it so that someone else knows about it.
How did they get there?
What is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it?
I'm from Jagon, I'm from Jagon too.
Gon se rede man
Dozens of people said they could not enter the building, but they said they knew what they were doing.
I'm going to do things that I don't know how to do.
It's either that, or it's that, or it's that, or it's that.
If I see this man talking to me, what will I do?
I'm just trying to protect you.
The people of the parman l ap vay lon lon kis ap pi eee
It is possible that the rays of the sun are reflected in the sun.
There is no such thing as a.
If I work, they can work on me.
Or you can do three days on a lot of people.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about anymore.
Don't worry, they can't help you.
A manche tells the people how many times you have to go to church.
You've got two things to do.
If you drink wine, how can you produce wine?
My son will never be able to see me again.
There is also a problem.
Other women are also able to escape the same fate as their children.
What problem do I have with having a child?
A woman, a child, or a child who can be reared for the sake of a child.
You don't know dimegri, do you?
I know dimegri.
only w Konn Bou.
Yo konn dipigri rale
For example, some people may not be able to do so.
They can't be sent to a ship or to a ship to find out how many days they have left.
How do you know who's going to make it?
men sa yen film men sa yen film
Men, do you know what I'm going to do when I die?
I'm going to use it, I'm going to use it, I'm going to use it, I'm going to use it, I'm going to use it, I'm going to use it, I'm going to use it, I'm going to use it, I'm going to use it, I'm going to use it, I'm going to use it, I'm going to use it, I'm going to use it, I'm going to use it, I'm going to use it, I'm going to use
I can't make it through the day.
Everything is new to me and I'm happy.
I can give you a little bit of advice on what I can do.
It's not a bad thing.
You can do it yourself.
I'm going to do the same thing now.
The good news is that we're sick.
I don't know what to do.
Li annouy de l
They did so in a way that didn't make any difference.
This is especially true if you are living with a serious illness.
W an man t pewe.
I don't know how to ride a bike with them.
Even the dead can be resurrected to life.
What is the meaning of life, what is the meaning of life, what is the meaning of life, and what is the meaning of life?
Is it now or am I coming from nowhere?
Nan, nan, yon.
Who, I am morage, I know, an order like this, do you want to win in?
I'm with you.
The people in the village of Benè a la
I can live a very lively life.
Now you know who you are, now you know who you are.
Someone else from your mother or stepfather is now on the move.
know or do it.
I'm going to tell you about it.
It's not like I don't know what I'm talking about.
Postponement, then the same day, two more tours, another tours, another tours, go fraye preske pwèè piè l bay li.
Pijan w di person who is a fan of a person
It's the same person who's been there for a long time.
The account of Maling la m
Well, on people like that, there's no such thing as epi, epi tout akou, or look.
They can't or won't.
They don't even know who they are.
I'm going to release it.
I will not be able to return, or I will not be able to return, but I will be able to decompose.
I don't need that knowledge, do I?
A person who is not good enough to do something and is only one person who suffers from it.
They're the only ones I've ever heard of.
They are in the right position.
Li gen yon capabisyan.
On the other hand, there is a lot of confusion about the quality of the product.
I'm very proud of you.
Se Patwiprens m prale
I have the option of redefining words or taking a decision as someone else does.
I'm going to tell you.
Sharing people or being able to good things with people.
Or two real people are going to have to go back to the drawing board again.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
L ap trepase
I don't want to order anymore.
I don't know how I'm going to deal with the agony.
There's no way around it.
Yo ba ordered jan
Yo pa de order jan
I don't want to eat again so I don't have to die.
It's not like they're going to die.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
Now a patient who knows how to do everything, especially don't say anything wrong.
It's either now or I'm going to die again.
They're sick of it.
A woman's cell on a farm and a woman's cell on a farm are the same as Pouloren's.
Do you have any idea who the woman is and what she is focusing on right now?
Pouloren's father was a politician.
I'm going to try to find a way to get people to listen to me.
A disease of the elderly.
You're the only one who knows how to grow up.
The things that make up the members of the family are the things that make up the family.
I can't live without you.
How sick are you?
One matis is a.
I'm in the bathroom at the end of the day.
Members of the network are so well-rounded.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
You are a new member.
It's like a disease like the pineal gland.
Yo gen bay
The code is also available for download.
I know they are maladis.
rele's maladis and li tò
It's been a while since I've been there.
They're going to take a lot of drugs or drugs.
It's also a bad day.
They can't do anything about it.
What are you doing here?
That's how we're doing it.
Men can't be bothered to do that.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about this place.
The ap is derived from the netimon yo
It's the same with John Doyle.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it to Las Vegas.
They don't know anything.
Yo bakonn di flèm lan
Cancer is a disease of the mouth.
It's all in your mouth.
There's nothing new I can do about it now.
It's all over the place.
I'm going to release it.
Bouch pete, bouch li gen nou apete, li gen nou ap wè l kaye, all from the mouth.
Coughing, coughing, wheezing, coughing, shortness of breath, pain in the stomach, pain in the stomach.
But sick men, I can go, I can go, I can go, I can go, I can go, I can't go, I can't go, I can't go, I can't go, I can't go, I can't go.
Yo gen men anlite touse osi
Yo gen te yo jouye kichan k ap gen again.
"Master, if you have a disease, if you do not cure a man, then this man will die".
What is it, Father, but what is it now?
Now that's a good idea.
Grand Chalè a, Grand Chalè a gen y ap ann Nanda, who ga touche ou, appeared touchtase nou bay, brother tou pran osi.
If I am the same man, how can I take my son and daughter from you?
Foss Perez, who are you?
I'm not sure I'm going to make it.
There are a lot of people out there who don't know how to win.
I can't wait to get back to work.
Pya, even if you're sick, why don't you go to the bathroom?
Malaria, Malaria, Malaria, etc. What else can you do?
So, what do you think of the frison?
If you want a frison head, you know, re.
If you are suffering from malaria, how can you get rid of it?
Men, even the devil can and will always be at your side, knowing that you are at your side.
Let it freeze.
Genetic or disease is not tolerated, nor can it itself be sustained by genetic factors.
It's not a bad idea.
Alone, or what?
However, there are some diseases that people know about, such as diabetes or diabetes.
Now it's too much.
Or any kind of thing you want, even if it's new.
It's not the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world
This is how we get to know each other.
One of the main reasons for this is that Gonflye 2 is not the same as Gonflye.
I don't know.
I've met more people than I've ever met before.
It's either that or you're going to have to wait until you're a man.
So many of my grandmothers know what to do about it.
Or I'll go through it all.
epi or benyen epi
There are men who are willing to give up their lives.
When I was a teenager, I wanted to do something.
It's been a long time coming.
It's like I'm doing this kind of thing.
You know, I've been doing a lot of things for a long time, and I've always known you.
I know how to ride a train.
The child will be born on the day of his birth.
It's the end of the world.
They've been figuring out how to make a year for a good crop.
It's the only thing I've ever done.
Ouy, kabri sann, kansan pou disyen?
Ouy, obèk kouch, pou sa te ansent.
It's been nine months.
Men are born before they are born.
I'm not going to live my life.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
Seven months, nine months, nine months, nine months, and so on.
Typically, these passages are meant to be used in a way that makes people feel better about themselves.
Who is going to die?
Men, they die, but as men are born, they do not even live, they are born that way.
or radi as a consul?
What kind of coffee is it?
I'm sorry or what?
Are you blessed or not?
How do you know what's going on?
I don't want to write a graph.
How do you know that I'm a big man and that I don't know what to do with myself?
I've been through a lot of stuff like that.
I'm going to do a little bit of cleaning up with you and your kids.
One knuckle, for example, is a piece of paper.
If there's a big debate about how I'm going to get out of it all, then I'm going to have to go back to the drawing board.
What is the meaning of life?
When you're ready to post, what do you think?
It's a great way to get things done.
There is no one who can win.
It's not like I'm going to release it.
I'm going to do it all over again, and I'm going to do it all over again.
Gen w ap mache in the water
I've learned a lot about women's rights.
I'm not going to let you guys get away with it.
It's called eczema.
I know what I'm talking about.
It's a great way to get a feel for yourself.
Some people also know about the album, but they don't know how to keep things in order, whether it's on the wall or in the living room.
He or she is not aware of the problem.
or release the grill.
And then there's all of them, and then there's all of them, and then there's all of them, and then there's all of them, and then there's all of them, and then there's all of them, and then there's all of them, and then there's all of them, and then there's all of them, and then there's all of them, and then there's all of them, and then there's all of them, and then there's all of them.
And then there's my uncle, who's not there yet.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you, and I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you.
One day I'll be back again and I'll be back again and I'll be back again and I'll be back again and I'll be back again and I'll be back again and I'll be back again and I'll be back again and I'll be back again and I'll be back again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and
W pa kandou diffè yon antonch
It was the eighth time.
If you don't know what to do with it, you don't know what to do with it, you don't know what to do with it, you don't know what to do with it, you don't know what to do with it, you don't know what to do with it, you don't know what to do with it, you don't know what to do with it, you don't know what to do with it, you don't know what to do with it, you don't know what to do with it.
It's all about a.
So, if there is a conflict between the two, what is the difference between the two?
Sa, sa kavye a an, before the foot a, li kavye an, before the foot a.
On the other hand, if you know what you're talking about, you know what you're talking about.
Or the right kind of thing to do.
You're all new to the brand or something like that.
It's not like you're going to be able to do anything with water or water.
I'm going to take the road less traveled.
It's not like I can say anything.
It's the right thing to do.
or take a session.
If you are a big man, you can win, you can win, you can win, you can win, you can win, you can win, you can win, you can win, you can win, you can win, you can win, you can win, you can win, you can win, you can win, you can win, you can win, you can win, you can win, you can win, you can win, you can win.
If you see two of them in the fig tree, you will see three of them.
When someone shows up to answer the question,
Or by a party of good friends to appear.
Can retire rap soul or rete la
You're going to have to deal with it or you're going to have to deal with it.
It's not about who you are or what you're going to be.
I'm so glad that you're here.
I'm always on the lookout for it.
They swear by the people.
You know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
It's not like I'm going to make a lemon or a lemon sauce.
You've got a whole new life.
Well, if your dog dies in the area of the room, water or a cabinet, it's safe to do so.
Or else they're going to use it.
Or not drinking li.
It's like a microwave.
There are many types of crashes.
There is no ban on wonseride.
I don't know where you are.
Yes, the people of Jilfonjan are treated like such a senadouk, even if they are often lauded for doing the same thing.
I don't know anything about it.
We'll see you soon.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
It's the only thing that makes you happy.
I've been waiting for you to come back.
You see yourself in this way.
Take care of yourself.
But like a tree that can't be picked up, it's easy to grow and grow.
A scientist can't have children.
I was sent to the hospital.
I'm one of those people in this area.
There are many ways to make people happy.
It's not like I'm going to run out of people.
He can take your bullet.
I'll tell you what, I'm going to put on a new one and I'm going to tell you what to do and I'm going to win.
Do you know what you want, compound or powder, wash or, and how do you know?
I know what you mean by enseridey
I met my beloved little girl and I knew what I wanted to do.
I've met people who want me to be able to do things I know how to do.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
It's a great way to get out of debt or pay the bills.
Yo creansè an de composition swat water or men li alot bal
I'm going to let it all go down here before then.
or chitason or va
It's also the first time I've seen it before.
I don't know if I'm going to have sex or anything like that.
You're right.
Whether it's a gift or not, it's a gift to someone.
or vision of man.
Either you can do it, or you can continue to do it.
OR the child is the child of the adult and the child is the child of the child.
Since then, I have not been able to keep up with the demands of children.
There is no direct connection to the paramedic's 25th birthday.
The one who is more than a man is more than a man.
We're going to do it together and we're going to continue with the baby bison.
It's my birthday today.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
There are many reasons why people can choose to take your advice.
You're too much of an asshole.
I'm not a rapper.
I know how to put my soul into people's hearts.
It's your birthday.
How I was born I have taken things to the end of the world and to the end of the world.
Take a look at what's going on here.
Take it from me.
This is what people do for a living.
That's what I'm going to do.
I'm going to tell you.
Now we have the power to build up our faith.
I can't wait to see what you've been up to.
I can't wait to see you.
I'm going to have to ask you a question.
They're basically doing the same thing.
Who is the third-greatest?
M, anse, mwen anon, mwen mwen an, mwen tipot la, mwen tipot la.
If you're going to meet a German, or if you're going to eat a German again, I don't know who you're talking to.
Since then it's all good.
It's all about you.
Since then, I've been able to get a hold of one of them.
An an lifen menmen even
It's either a pass or a depot.
Val kouton person of one ansè one nonray sa yo pi
The man who knew the woman was there.
Whoever wants to eat is going to have to pay for it.
It's been a while since I've been to the bar.
These are the people who are here.
But then again, Boure l la, faral la.
It can be done by someone or something.
The children of the people and the teachers of the people of the country.
Or do I know how or what to do.
Or who are you?
The people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people.
Or do I tell you about each other?
And if you're a man, who knows what you're talking about?
Or the order of the la
It's an order that I'm going to do.
Someone's up your ass or something.
Li pap de o pa a
I'm not sure if I'm ready or not.
What's wrong with these people?
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
We're going to have a life or a life.
Kabann li toube y ap lise
There are two types of people.
It's not like I'm going to be big.
I'm going to be a big fan.
I'm going to be a big fan of my grandmother's.
It's not big enough for someone to be big enough for you.
They don't want to get married until they get married.
Why do I have to go to the bathroom?
A young man is a young man and there is nothing left of his father, his grandfather, his great-grandfather, his great-grandfather, his great-grandfather, his great-grandfather.
Who is married, single, single, single, single, or still a young man?
It's the first time I've seen it.
A young man is also a young man.
or love personaj
You're not the only one.
or male bay
Kouye kouye a
Are you alone?
Men, men, how do you get along, how do you get along, how do you get along?
Do you know who served in the battalion?
Dad, I don't know what that means.
This is a great man.
There are people who don't like it.
It's all in your face.
There's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
They're not that kind of people.
They're not like that anymore.
They're just like that.
They're looking like they've never seen anything like this before.
They've seen people who don't know each other, and they've got a lot of kids.
There is a ban on it.
Li rekesfòsab and kay la
Reskonn you all affected by kay la
I'm the only one who wants to know.
Pigout or wine dakade
If you want to see a digrenn bay m
I'm not a man.
It's time to move on to the next generation.
If you're going to get close to 100 tons a
I'm happy with what people know.
I'm going to be 20 years old.
It's a great way to get to know people.
One who pays for the gen
And then there's the big picture.
I'm not a young man anymore.
This is why people are always looking for ways to make money.
I'm not sure if they've been there yet.
I'm not going to lie to you.
A person who drinks is known to say: A
Why should I eat them?
Just as a person can die, there is no such thing as a person who does not know how to die.
Don't play an exotic game for good or bad.
Tell me if someone is behind you and says, "Oh!"
I'll be right behind you.
I don't think I'm going to be able to do anything that I'm not going to do.
It's like someone's dying.
Something is going on.
They don't know.
They are the same.
Loggade yo gen the same epi
They've even made it to the top.
For example, children and adults should be given the following examples:
I know that children have to do things differently.
That's why I'm a big fan.
I don't know what happened.
The children are adjuncts to each other.
Kill as you kill as you kill.
As I've seen it before.
I'll kill you as soon as possible.
Now you're ready to move on.
Or you know it.
I'm going to do the same thing.
or vini touze
That's what I'm doing.
I'm going to make it consistent.
You're going to be consumed.
I'm going to have to pay for it.
I'm going to sleep with you.
I'm not a big fan of it.
I'm going to sleep and I'm going to sleep and I'm going to sleep and I'm going to sleep and I'm going to sleep and I'm going to sleep and I'm going to sleep and I'm going to sleep and I'm going to sleep and I'm going to sleep and I'm going to sleep and I'm going to sleep and I'm going to sleep and I'm going to sleep and I'm going to sleep and I'm going to sleep and I'm going to sleep and I'm going to sleep and
I'm going to sleep with you and I'm going to sleep with you and I'm going to sleep with you and I'm going to sleep with you and I'm going to sleep with you and I'm going to sleep with you and I'm going to sleep with you and I'm going to sleep with you and I'm going to sleep with you and I'm going to sleep with you and I'm going to sleep with you and I'm going to sleep with you and I'm going to sleep with you and I'm going to sleep with you.
That's why I'm here.
Please, if I'm like this, I'm going to start, I'm going to sleep, I'm going to go to the bathroom.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
Or is it a dream?
or plè men m la count li men
I don't want to be in a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar or a bar.
He is a great man.
It is important to remember that the people who live here are the ones who live here.
They're the same as you.
It's not like they don't want to be here.
Some of them are very knowledgeable, but they are also very knowledgeable.
I'm the one who's going to be there.
I'll send you or load up an epi-dock.
Or is it that I don't know how to do it now?
I will be back.
Esou ou gadon jou an a series of people lan
I can do it this way.
And in my time I did so.
I can do this and that.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
At the feast of Kontran, after as much as you have done, or as much as you have done, I will continue to respond to my crystals of triumph.
Well, if you're going to win, you're going to win.
One of the most important things I've ever done is sell it to a man.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to get into it.
I'm old enough to know better.
A child's bracelet is passed through the yo plap plap plap plap.
Yo volèl yo run
There's no other way to do it again.
I'm going on vacation and I'm going to do a lot of things for you.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I'm with you or I'm with you.
There's no such thing.
I can't wait for the next one to come up and do it or I'll fall in love with you.
If you're going to stop here, I'm going to stop here.
I'm going to have to go through the epiphany.
I'm going to stop by and see what happens.
That's why I can do it or pass it.
De plase is not w
I'm going to put you on the brake pad.
It's not like I'm going to burn or do something like that.
That's what I'm doing.
Can you believe it?
Wherever you go, there's a lot to do.
I don't know how to do this.
I'm going to take a look at it.
I'm going to take a look at it.
It's not like I don't know what's going on.
Or chavire li, or wal leve l..
Or not.
If I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it.
Or I might as well, too.
You'll be blown away by what's going on.
I'm going to go into my room and I'm going to do it.
It's not your grandmother.
You don't want to be in a situation where you don't want to be in a situation where you don't want to be in a situation where you don't want to be in a situation where you don't want to be in a situation where you don't want to be in a situation where you don't want to be in a situation where you don't want to be in a situation where you don't want to be in a situation where you don't want to be in a situation where you don't want to be in a situation where you don't want
It's the biggest animal in Egypt.
I don't want to be with anyone.
I'm going to do something about it.
I don't want to see you again.
I want to get married in the next few days.
You need someone to get up and do it.
It's the same as anyone else's.
Doc or evremye po po two of these people
I need to see if I can climb the ladder.
What are you going to do about it?
I'm wondering if I'm up to it?
Someone who has done it all, so I can do it for you.
Can you take it?
Someone who knows what's going on, who knows what's going on, who knows what's going on, who knows what's going on, who knows what's going on, who knows what's going on, who knows what's going on, who knows what's going on, who knows what's going on, who knows what's going on, who knows what's going on.
Is there anything I can tell you to do about it?
Do not test yourself before you buy a lot of things.
They were not able to buy them at the time of the accident.
Or so it seems.
He knows how to use it.
Do you have a calculation?
On the person or can be ben avec li anvil
It's either a good idea or a bad idea.
I don't want to say anything about what I'm going to do.
How do you know who I am?
I don't know what to do with myself.
Is that the only way?
What do you think I've ever thought of?
Well, I've never thought about what you'd do to me.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again.
It's not that we don't know what we're doing.
There is a lot of money to be made.
They're men in the team.
If something happens here, I'm going to kill you.
Now you know where you are, or you know everything that's going to happen.
I don't know where I'm going but I've got a good idea.
If I drink this man's wine, can I drink a glass of wine?
If there's something that's going on, it's going on.
But I know that a man's experience of this thing is a man's ability to do well.
If you can give me some good advice.
Sa yon vin vil koto, sa yon vin penche la.
How can I give you advice?
Do you know how to ban wine from your home?
One of the people who spoke about it, how long has it been?
It's always a bullet in my head, always a bullet in my head, but I always say something or someone does to me.
If I'm still here, do they know what they're talking about?
Pankou la, if you're going to party, I'm not going to kill you.
I'm going to live in the middle of a party.
I'm not in the water.
I don't know where to start.
Is it a man or a woman?
What if I forget what I'm doing?
It has been recovered from the minnyèw 531 years ago.
I don't want to forget about it.
I can't wait to get to the coast.
This is how I feel about men.
People ask for a pallet in the head or in the men's room.
You know what I mean.
You're the one who needs to know.
I want you to let me know what's going on.
Who am I supposed to be with?
I know people who have died on the basis of Christianity, but they are not.
People have died in the line of duty.
It's like a par exjanm.
It's like a genus that needs to be treated this way.
And I'm going to make you the one who's looking for a new one.
There is no such thing as a new wine.
I'm going to do it.
I'm the director.
The man and the woman.
It's not like I'm playing tennis here.
Those who call on someone to do something before the time is right, they will do what they have to do.
They're investing in people.
For example, in the case of a car or a car, you can buy a car or a car or a car.
I'd like to hear the words sing.
There's a lot of people out there.
Are you ready for this?
A lot of people are on the phone and they never know what they're doing.
It's not easy to make money slowly.
What can I do for you?
Are you the only one who knows?
I don't know yet.
I don't know what I'm going to tell you.
I'm going to win you over.
Yo santi bonbou o o o
You don't know how to be happy.
Or I'll tell you what.
I'm not going to be able to do this for a long time.
Or they've been changed for you.
I don't know where I'm going to find someone like that.
Or you can get a toothbrush.
I don't know who you are.
It's so much fun to be with someone you don't know.
That's why I'm here.
The people in the room are dejoun w wage tanvini
I don't even have a room with my dad.
Now I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
or no discussion like that
Or I'm a member of that group and I want to be a part of it.
Finalman or good?
Good fish or want good.
I'm not gay.
What do you mean?
Or do it because you want it to be done.
I want to win a lavò
wine and wine.
As the beginning or the end of the wine making process.
Because it's either the beginning or the end.
or pa t m
Make the idea of wine better than it used to be.
This is the only way or the only way.
There's no other way or I'll tell you.
or di vin nou m M vin vle a lav wouy wouy
Pise w w di di di ankan
Because I want a clean slate.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm going to go ahead and do it.
If you don't want to or can't turn it, turn it on.
before or after turning or hearing the person who has been injured.
Whether it's animals or people, it's not what you want.
I don't want to see you again.
Kiss or kadou or gen nan katou?
or gen rayisab.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to make it to the beach or the beach.
It's not like I don't want to be on the receiving end of a ponytail.
or to be realized.
sa or du or kapab tay.
Men have problems, men have problems.
Men have the same problem.
Or in the same two productions.
It's not a matter of passing through.
Such as the gen of an equation between people and t ap people ouri
Appear to the person who has the right to speak.
I'm going to have to do it again.
Either I'm going to stay here all the time or I'm going to keep myself in my head.
That's why I'm here.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
It's time to get to the bottom of it.
En tout tan, I've heard you eat like that.
If I have a purpose in my life, I have a purpose, if I have a purpose in my life, I have a purpose.
I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know,
Some of them are full men.
How do I know I'm full?
Applenye, ral kil li.
For every man, every man, every woman, every man, every man, every woman, every man, every woman, every man, every woman, every man, every woman, every man, every woman, every man, every woman, every man, every woman, every man, every woman, every man, every woman, every man, every woman, every man, every woman, every man, every woman, every man, every woman, every woman, every man, every woman, every woman, every man, every woman, every woman, every woman, every woman, every woman, every woman, every man
Men in the calculation of Moun Konn Men in the calculation of the number of men in the calculation of the number of men in the calculation of the number of men in the calculation of the number of men in the calculation of the number of men in the calculation of the number of men in the calculation of the number of men in the calculation of the number of men in the calculation of the number of men in the calculation of the number of men in the calculation of the number of men in the calculation of the number of men in the calculation of the number of
A person who has lost his or her hearing will not be able to compete with a dragon's ear.
I lost all my money and money.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to take the lead on this one.
They lost all their money.
If you know what you're talking about, you'll know what you're talking about.
Take a look at some of the people you've met before.
Renn for men is not in charge.
Or the chanl candidate too.
He is also a candidate for the presidency.
or pa la vann men
Whether it's a big thing or something that's going to happen or something that's still going to happen, I don't understand.
Or do you know how many guys I've come up with, or do you know how to do that?
Ask them if they can make a decision or not.
He or she can serve as president or vice president.
It's all about tooth decay.
Or if you don't know if you can stand up.
I don't know if I can do it or not.
It's either that or I don't know what to do.
Now we know that we can make a difference.
And then there's the fact that you can't see people.
There are a lot of people out there who know how to do this.
A lot of savò and men are full.
or pa ta atann or concert like zanlou sochwa other kote kivili
It's not like I'm getting married or anything like that.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it.
Or don't have anything to do with it.
The two men were able to make a phone call.
Or did you just come back?
Men, who do you think you are?
The answer is no.
Di, I'm going to leave you and I'm going to leave you.
Counselor, if someone says a word or a word, listen.
I said, "If anyone eats a plate of meat, I don't know how to tell them what to eat".
How are you doing?
It's not about the people or the people.
Everything I've got in front of me is new to me.
They're not going to be able to find new people or anything like that.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
They're all a ton of fun.
It's not like a person has a right to privacy.
Or someone who doesn't know.
You have to use new words.
It's going to be a lot of fun.
Or put on a drink because things are still going on.
or royal sou li an
I don't want to go through with it.
I'm on the same page even apologizing.
That's the way it is.
One of the people I've met so I don't know who I am.
They don't eat anything.
It's like the la here.
It's not like I'm passing through it.
I respect everyone who is like me, even if it's not my fault.
It's all about the person or the whole thing.
I don't know who I'm talking about.
If I had the chance to meet with you, I'd have even put on men's shoes.
A lifetime's worth of pity for someone new.
It's one of those things that people have to deal with.
I don't know if I'm an adult.
It's either a whole bunch or a bunch of them.
I'm not going to eat them.
If you don't have a brother or sister, you don't have a brother or sister, and you don't have a brother or sister, you don't have a brother or sister.
An elderly kal zidran an, or re.
I don't know how to deal with people, but I'm disagreeable.
I don't know, either.
It's not like I don't know who they are.
They hear it well, they express it well, and they will hear it well.
I'm going to try to put the branch on the doorstep.
They don't need to talk to people.
On the other hand, you can either go to the bathroom or go to the bathroom.
One of the people who can make a living from it is the one who has the power to make a living.
It's all in your face.
They make or break it.
such as se koukorye a la o pa t up li
They're on good terms.
Who are you or what's going on?
It's all about the people.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
You're not going to be able to keep up with the swans, but you're going to be able to keep up with the swans every day.
Moun, n ap piga se where?
What do you think of it?
OR for someone who is the principal of a school, isn't that right?
It is possible for someone to banish their genes.
I'm a man of my dreams and I don't know what to do with myself.
Any day to make you feel better.
That's how I feel about you.
Li yon kadmi people met
The people of Zanzibar are against the ruler of Nanit.
There is a handkerchief in the back of the handkerchief.
It's not a genus.
E chak wa manchef chak wa manchef ki an an two others others anse a sen
Jonse l demoun or ka ka fi m gen kontanvel and li
Yo dwan tansye o veje jou a
They're going to have an epot tel bada
I don't know what I'm talking about.
When an adult comes to the end of a barrier like this one, he'll have to pay for it.
I'm not sure what they're going to say.
It's just that we're not so good at it.
How did you say that?
It's about growing up and growing up.
It's like you're old enough to know better.
There are no people who are willing to fight with a ton of one-on-one missions.
A person who is a pi pi of the basis of li
Kon ya moun chan wè missionè
I'm not going to tell you what to do next.
Li chan w may not be able to do so.
As an adult.
I know.
And then someone else will come to you and give you a chance to do something about it.
Don't be afraid to ask for help from someone else.
I'm going to take it.
They're here to help.
Aside from my return to the coast, I was able to find a way to stop him.
I can't get along with a man.
What's new?
The account is here.
Envigwen can help people who need a new batag
I did everything I could to make a new batag.
You've given up on people.
Well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well,
People like that, people like that, people like that.
And anyone who can or can't hear me can't hear me.
Who is Kiwi Sa?
One of the men is in his head.
A person who has been in a position to speak to a person for a while, a person who has been in a position to speak to a person for a while.
So what do you do with the rest of the world?
Then you'll have to make sure that you're on your own.
This is one of my trips.
There are many other people out there who don't care.
Some people like to put their minds on Judah.
It's like even a la.
Gen of great people I go to contrasts with li
I'm going to call Jan to give me a day off.
It can also be used as a food additive for people with disabilities.
It's like someone who's working for a job.
Today we are going to have a new wine.
demen mancha or ap joun travad a chak thus
How can I go on such a journey to a place or a place where I can find joy?
Anrodisa is here.
I'm going to tell you what's new.
Or two bedrooms.
How am I supposed to do this on the level?
The people are flattened.
People say that they're the same person.
The person who has become a workaholic for many outsiders, etc., is something else.
If you are a hypocrite.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
Li pa gen batim an men la
I'm going to be bathing on the ocean floor.
They're always on the lookout.
There's a lot of great things that people can do.
I'm an angel and that's it.
I know who you are.
There are two types of people.
They're always up to the task.
People sleep with enteresant.
If you take the bottle, the bottle is like two silks, two of them are too small to hold.
I'm not going to be able to keep my head down so I don't have to rest when someone else doesn't want to.
A lot of people in the world believe that a person who has the ability to do something like this will do it.
The kitchen is filled with people.
Frequently asked questions.
It's not like I don't know what I'm talking about.
They are no longer alive.
They say that people have the right to borrow money if they borrow it for a pill.
Who's going to do this?
Men, people need to fight back.
The people of fon man bagal la, pi, men, pi, adult nan, fon, as tindadou, adult nan vin move.
You can either eat or drink or you can't eat or drink.
There is also a patou an patou an
Tell me how you're going to be with your dad.
It's not just me, it's you.
patou an fache
I can't wait to see what I can do.
It's not like I'm dying.
It is a matter of time and people.
It's like having children.
This is what happens.
I only have a chance.
I'm going to talk to someone who's having a heart attack.
It's not a ton.
There are many types of people who can fwon bris or have a lot of them on their hands.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
Or if you're going to take people's clothes off.
You drink a console and you're drunk.
Drinking as an alcoholic.
b m ap from drinking to tell me what I'm doing.
They don't want to see a person with cancer.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
or bak an
It's now or never.
It's either that or it's that.
I'll give you an example of anything to do with the pen.
From the bottom to the bottom like I'm like I'm going to take a break.
Tandan on thing deva tandan on thing deva
There is no such thing as a man who can't help himself.
Who are you, Brave?
You may have the right to an epic poem, or you may have the right to an epic poem, or you may have the right to an epic poem, or you may have the right to an epic poem, or you may have the right to an epic poem, or you may have the right to an epic poem, or you may have the right to an epic poem, or you may have the right to an epic poem, or you may have the right to an epic poem.
To be honest, I'm not a man, I'm a man, I'm not a man.
I'm going to have to clean up my house, or I'm going to have to clean up my house and I'm going to have to clean up my house and I'm going to have to clean up my house and I'm going to have to clean up my house and I'm going to have to clean up my house and I'm going to have to clean up my house and I'm going to have to clean up my house and I'm going to have to clean up my house and I'm going to have to clean up my house and I'm going to
It's not like I'm going to be able to make it up to you.
It's a great way to get to know people.
We are not going to be able to do anything for you and your family.
They say they're O
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
I know my father and I know who they are.
It's something you don't want people to do.
Or take a tooth.
The good news is that the people who know me are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who
The people of Chanye Tél sou wè w
I don't feel compelled to do anything like this.
What can I do about it?
Or do I have to cut it with you?
Reziye, what do I have to do to help you?
Or, what would you say?
Do you want to know my name or, people?
I don't know if I'm going to make a fight yet.
I don't know what to say or what to say to someone.
One of the few exceptions to the rule is to win.
They deserve to win.
There is no exapt li
They don't want to win.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
There's no such thing as a great man.
A great man is a dev thing and a great man is a great man.
I'm not going to let you do this again.
What are you going to do about it?
I'm with Bannal, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you
If you don't know who I'm going to be with, you'll find the other person who's going to be with you is fine.
The two of you I'm staying with, I'll be back with, I'll be back with the card.
What's the matter with you?
Ever since I've been there, someone has stood up.
I'm with you on the conveyance.
The money is in full swing.
If it's not a woman, it's a woman.
I don't care about anyone.
They can't let their children get away with it.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
Some people are on the lookout for it.
Are you ready for this?
I'm not sure if I'm going to take responsibility for this, but I know I'm going to take responsibility for this.
I mean, if you want to get in touch with Pi or, you know, anon, you'll still have someone to talk to.
There are still people who don't know Azil Gen of people bayizan
Li gen of wès yon like titou
There's only one western model that I can use for Nikon.
But then again, there's another one.
But it is on the conscience of the people.
ponsèy de kay
They're up for a façade.
One facade li gen kat things ladanm twati a
One release of twati sa.
It's just a matter of time before we get back to the drawing board.
There is no such thing as a substitute.
or a substitute.
He knows how to do what he wants to do in the garden.
If you can't do that in the garden, you can't do that in the garden.
It is possible to do or when or how to rest.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
men to order jan
They don't know when it's going to happen.
If you don't take it easy, you can't take it easy on anyone else.
I've taken several of these people with me.
It's been a month or so.
I don't know if there was anyone who wanted to kiss me in the net.
I'm going to get up in the morning and get back to where I am.
It's not like I'm going to kiss you.
I've heard a lot about it, and I can't wait to hear it.
The end result is that we can do everything in the fear of the future in such a way.
You can either fwon things or put everything on the table, including li asman rayza yo
Or you can put a grenade or something in it.
I'm going to do it.
or k ap hour granou ladan nou
I'm not even going to do it on a glazed background.
Or is it just a matter of stopping to make the kitchen roll?
It is a salty sauce of potatoes or spices.
You graduated from Chanen.
This is a picture of me.
It's always good for you.
It's all right, why should I?
You can't do anything like this or do it all over again.
San o pwoko put this year on your li
It's covered in a bay.
It's like you're just one or two.
On the relational board, I'm on the board for the next few days.
If you put your foot through the door, it's against the clock to keep the clock on, like a fire.
It's like you're on your own.
is derived from your sword.
It's your fault.
I'm trying to figure out what's wrong with you.
It's like I'm sitting on a couch covered in sugar.
It's covered by the cover.
I'm not going to lie to you.
I'm tired of it too.
I've never been able to find it.
I think I've got a lot to say.
I'm going to release it.
Fin m klise kay la lò
I know how to take things that I can do, such as putting on something to cover up a clinic because I can't.
It's the only way to do it.
You are a Mason.
You're a fine mason and you're a good man.
I'm going to do the same thing.
I'm going to clean up the mess.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it, and I'm going to tell you a little bit about it, and I'm going to tell you a little bit about it, and I'm going to tell you a little bit about it, and I'm going to tell you a little bit about it, and I'm going to tell you a little bit about it, and I'm going to tell you a little bit about it, and I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
I'm going to tell you about it.
What do you think about it?
I'm going back to my cell.
There's a cell, there's a cell, there's a cell.
When I was younger, did I feel too slow?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
They may not be able to take advantage of the fact that they don't know what's going on.
on fonse yon ti kote o gen nwa menn malet
All the children of the world are born into a family.
There are two types of people.
Jan yo le l blanche.
The other side of the equation is that if you are grateful, then you are more than Palmis.
If you are a woman and a man, you are a man and a woman.
It's either good or bad.
I know what you're going to do when you're done.
It's the only way I'm going to be able to train them when they're done.
No, it's not that you don't want to, it's that you don't want to, it's that you don't want to, it's that you don't want to, it's that you don't want to, it's that you don't want to, it's that you don't want to, it's that you don't want to, it's that you don't want to, it's that you don't want to, it's that you don't want to.
Men's shoes, men's shoes, men's shoes, men's shoes, men's shoes, men's shoes, men's shoes, men's shoes, and all that?
E jalozi, jen men bali, yo re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re re
So, where's the sheep coming from?
I can't wait to get my stuff up and running.
I'm going to make such a video or I'm going to tell you I'm going to make a video or I'm going to tell you I'm going to make a video or I'm going to make a video or I'm going to make a video or I'm going to make a video or I'm going to make a video or I'm going to make a video or I'm going to make a video or I'm going to make a video or I'm going to make a video or I'm going to make a video or I'm
I'm going to buy some of the items I'm looking for.
I can't wait to get started.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it again.
It's like you can't take it with you.
But a couple of pills can also be used to treat new skin conditions.
A, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a,
I don't know if it's your fault, because you're covering it, and you're stealing it.
I can't help but wonder if I can cover my hair.
What's going on?
Or do you want me to fall in love with you, don't you?
Anyone who has ever heard of it can drop a line in a series of kay.
Generate a series of solid granite holes for closure of a
There's a way to get through the door or be able to get through the door when you open the door.
I can't pass it completely new.
The men were able to enter when they were denied entry.
You know what, you're a Galician.
I know the concert thing.
If you are too old to know where I am.
I've made room for you to make a window.
I opened the window and opened the door for you.
You're going to have to put tonseride in your mouth to get in nonmalon.
There's a lot of people out there who know me.
One of them is in the lake.
M ap annen won the relay l..
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
Do you want to talk about me or about men?
Tankou po sa, big cell, or make men.
I'm defining it or I'm not defining it or I'm not defining it or I'm not defining it or I'm not defining it or I'm not defining it or I'm not defining it or I'm not defining it or I'm not defining it or I'm not defining it or I'm not defining it or I'm not defining it or I'm not defining it or I'm not defining it or I'm not defining it or I'm not defining it
W w w win
I'll tell you what to do next.
I'm going to tell you a story.
I'll tell you what to do.
I'm on my way in.
I'll tell you what to do.
I'm going to take a look at it.
I'm going to make men.
I'm going to take it.
I don't know what to do.
It's a bit of a waste of time.
Or take the bag.
Or I'll put in another one that I don't know what to do with.
I know what I'm doing.
I don't know what to do about it.
or de cochte l..
I can't help but wonder.
I don't want to talk about it anymore.
It's time to do something about it.
I've been doing it for years.
Is there such a thing as a good man, a good man, a good man, a good man, a good man, a good man, a good man, a good man, a good man, a good man, a good man, a good man, a good man, a good man, a good man, a good man, a good man, a good man, a good man, a good man, a good man, a good man?
You can't have all the children and play with them.
On the other side of the room.
on the lake.
It's not like it's a problem.
That's why I'm trying to get back to the tray.
or bale li
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it to the next level.
Or we can only be one and the same.
Anpazi la yo
Kay no la
on gwon la
Now you know what I'm talking about.
Is there a way to get there?
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again.
It's just that they're not there.
There are a number of listans.
Li finca yo can or take everything sa to enter or good to you.
Who's going to plant your garden, what's going on, or what's going on?
What do you do or what do you do?
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything.
I can enter the kay la pou.
I don't know if I'm going to give you anything good.
O kennou and met also include tou siboule
I know how to look, I know what to wear, I know how to wear everything.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I'm a workaholic.
I'm a big fan of being able to do things for myself.
I'm sure you've heard of it before.
Kay la la other
I'm not going to say anything else again.
I was in the kitchen.
I don't know where I'm going to put it.
Why not go ahead, how can I call them?
It's a tonel.
If there is anything I can do, how can I do it?
I've always been fascinated by them.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
It's not the end of the world.
There is no such thing as an angel.
Yes, or no, I don't want to go to the bathroom.
If you want to know what's going on in your life, you have to know what's going on in your life.
The men were locked up.
They know what they want and they want to do what they want to do in the end.
When I was a kid, I could see you on foot.
I'm going to make you walk.
I'm like the old man.
I made a long way to get in there, to get up or down the same hill, to get in the way.
If I could do something where I wanted to do it, how could I do it?
It's the salt of the earth.
Relieving, not allowing members of your staff, pantheon, or coat, or being able to play the role of tankal, I was born to spy on you.
You can put radis or nou wap party
I can't put radis or li or gen working l
Pan is released.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do a series of dramas or anything like that.
Kichan releases the lin.
The one who looks ahead, the one who wants to sit down before the one who can.
I'm going to tell you something new.
I'm going to tell you the end of the story.
The people will enter the wine here.
It's going to be my birthday.
It's been a while.
Ever since the dawn of time, I have been able to eat my soul on my lips.
In front of the tab, you're in the app now.
Kón gen yon pi was born preske kouwè chair
You want to make it so you want to make it so you want to make it so.
Contchirèn men chat on an adult appeal
I've been practicing this for a long time.
So quickly, men, when you are in such a position, men, when you are in your position, you are in your position.
One of them is to put on a coat of arms.
He or she may or may not do the same thing, or he or she may or may not do the same thing.
I know how to do mainly an anchou.
I know how to do something like this or I can bleve or chat on my own.
I'm thinking behind the scenes of it.
I don't have another one yet.
There's no other way around it.
I'm not a genius.
Now I'm alone, but I've even met you.
How do you know what you're talking about?
Protect yourself if you want to be with me now that you know what you're getting into.
There's no such thing as a free lunch when it comes to what I'm doing.
I don't know how to put things together.
There's something I've always wanted to do.
There's something wrong with that.
There's something about men.
How do you know if I'm going to be locked up or not?
If I know where these people are, I'm not going to be there.
Meb, if you lie down, lie down.
Vilkabon, that's the way it is.
I'm going to lie down.
It's not like I'm going to take a break from the game.
I'm going to take it.
They're the ones who've got it all figured out.
I took what I could pass as much as I could.
I'm going to sleep, what's the big deal?
ben mat, how do you take mat?
I know I have kibandan to cook, are you going to lead me to men?
Mat la men
I'm not sure if I'm ready or not.
I can't wait to get my hands on the soundtrack.
Is there a man in your arms, a man in your arms, a man in your arms, a man in your arms, a man in your arms, a man in your arms, a man in your arms, a man in your arms, a man in your arms, a man in your arms, a man in your arms, a man in your arms, a man in your arms, a man in your arms?
Do you know who I am?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
There are seven things I'm talking about for four hours and we're here.
What's the problem?
They're very close.
I know you're full of shit.
They know how to do it.
They've been there for you.
They have glass in them.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I've been using other animals before.
They just won't be here now, and they're going to be born, they're going to be born, they're going to be born, they're going to be born, they're going to be born, they're going to be born, they're going to be born.
It's not the end of the world.
I don't know who you are.
It's not the same as Mtyè's.
I'm going to have to go to the bathroom.
There's a lot more to it than that.
This is the kind of person who is born to do things for you.
When my mother's or father's womb falls, I fall asleep on my own.
Kon yon great series great bay granm distant where to win l al met rad li
There are no papers.
It's been a while since I've seen it.
I know what you're talking about.
For who are the wicked men?
On the p ap gen por kay la la
Or two longjan sale pou ou gen yon bay or to buy
You can come and do something like this.
Or I could come up with a different color.
Sa or do kay la la.
If I put a man or a woman in the house, how can I do it?
I'm here for you.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do next.
We're not going to be able to do anything about it.
When I saw a lamp, I put a lamp on it.
I know more than that.
It's also the last time you've read it.
This is the first time I've ever prayed.
I'm sure you've heard of them all before, but I'm sure you've heard them all before.
This is a prayer.
I don't know if there's a lamp.
I won the Jandèl
There are other things I know that can be done or done.
What I'm trying to do is do the same thing.
You don't have to be white.
Where do you go from here?
That's why I'm here, Kay.
To buy to buy l
As far as I'm concerned, you've got to be on your own.
van pa gen dwa jenn a lineè a
They've been eating men for a long time.
They're going to have to pay their bills, but they're not going to pay their bills.
They are not mallets.
Kou releases a
They're the same place I'm doing now.
I'm not going to be able to do this right now, but I'm going to be able to do this right now.
The new railway made it possible to keep the codes in place.
It's a pocket.
John is the father of the family.
Jon se deb deb a or
I'm not going to lie to you.
K ap fan series or mete w fan of this one
Fwon ti thing
In this way, you can meet the 16 on the front 6 of the entrance.
A p p ap ap on the bay or at the kizan la
and relayed to the bay of Zanit.
I'm sure you'll know if you can make a title.
One of the few places I've ever met a woman.
It's a great way to get started.
A bay is a bay.
What kind of flour is it?
I know you're debay men l
You can take a bear from a big fight or you can put it in a ball of lanma tea.
They want to make a living.
I don't know how to take anything new.
What did Kijan say?
Ebal, or w ap chte li mainly nou ap batifye or well w ap fetip garèpò, li pèp tab.
Kijan was crying.
What can you do to them or not to them, and why?
How do you feel about this, do you?
I don't want to pass the manwa choche te baray man and I don't want to pass the manwa choche te baray man and I don't want to pass the manwa choche te baray man and I don't want to pass the manwa choche te baray man and I don't want to pass the manwa choche te baray man and I don't want to pass the manwa choche te baray man.
What's the matter with you in La Choche?
The ruler of the kingdom has fallen.
I know the series of books.
They're not the only ones.
Dokouba has no choice but to take his own life.
I'm going to take you.
They're going to do Lizyel's whole thing, and they're going to do a whole bunch of things like that.
And now, come Wovè, there is nothing to be done about it again, Obenel is not the only one who knows what to do about it.
They're going to have to wait and see, or see, if they know what's going on.
to die.
And fouge a
I know what it's like.
The things I've done so far have been the same.
They're not going to be able to do it.
I don't know what I'm going to do.
That's what you put coal in to do right now.
Get up there and spend the rest of the day with Anne Li on the limide.
They don't want to give up.
They were taken out.
Or rad to do a healthy men's room.
or gen nou ale or an nou paket bay sou or rad la epi
I'll be there for you, I'll be there for you, I'll be there for you, I'll be there for you, I'll be there for you, I'll be there for you, I'll be there for you, I'll be there for you, I'll be there for you, I'll be there for you, I'll be there for you, I'll be there for you, I'll be there for you, I'll be there for you, I'll be there for you, I'll be there for
It's not like they're going to be able to keep up with him.
If there is no other way, or if there are two ways, then there are two ways, and if there is one way, then there is one way.
I don't know if I'm going to call them men.
If you're a man, you're a man.
There are all kinds of things in front of us.
They're there for you.
I'm going to eat them all.
What do you think I'm going to do?
Enbi, do you want to read your verse?
Everything you say or do, you say or do, you put it out again.
It's so red that you can sell it.
Do you know what I'm talking about?
What do you want me to do?
It's the law of the land.
That's what it's all about.
An Act that made me cry touch the le
I'm going to try and make it up to you.
How can I do it with a velatin, and how do you speak it?
It's as if you're talking to them.
What I'm going to do with my life is make a difference.
It's either a base or a picket fence.
There are four things you can do to get water.
I've learned that even my mom doesn't know how to talk to me.
They don't know how many attacks they're going to make.
Li konw you know that even I can't read the code.
That's why I'm going to do this.
I can't wait to get back to you.
It's not like I'm going to let you down.
Sometimes these people are the ones who talk like that.
I know I've been there before.
That's what I'm doing right now.
Chak bay sa ki yon renle limen.
I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing, I know what I'm doing.
Men, where am I?
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it.
Man, come on, what's the big deal, what's the big deal?
We're going to have to make some money.
It's the same with Annele Li.
They are men.
It's been a long time coming.
We will continue to use the same version every year.
If you want to be able to be a big member, for example, you have to be a big member.
I'll be there soon.
If you're a man, why are you crying?
You can't do that.
Why can't we do something like this?
Why can't we do something like this?
How can we do that?
Is there a man who can't speak French for himself?
There is someone like you.
Or where I put it.
Like when I vinp met won other akay consant tichan w rele sa.
Men, chapo souti?
It's the other way around.
It's not the end of the world.
It's a cassette.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
tichan le li.
If you don't want to go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom.
I didn't take the fridge.
I'm not going to take things for granted.
I'm going to do it all over again.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I'm going to stay here a ton.
By order of Jan
I'm sure they'll be able to get a new one.
I'm sorry to hear about this.
A single family.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
You even look like a big-headed bison.
Or you know when they're going to come back or watch how they're going to do it.
They have the right to go to Egypt without a woman or a man.
You don't want to feel like you've been saved.
Yo bi yo or gon nou.
You are an angel.
It's not like I'm going to tell you how to deal with men.
Like the good news of the Baptism.
In a nutshell, is that what you're saying about Baptism?
My father, my mother.
I am the son of Aven, and I am the son of Aven, and I am the son of my wife.
What if I met you in my place?
Mwen, clean a t ap di or ye pou li?
Believe that you can drink or talk about it.
I can't or won't hear my voice.
I've been waiting for you.
Good luck to you.
I'm the same man.
father or brother.
It's been a long time coming.
It's the story of who I am.
People as far away as Moutyen, but the prayers of people as far away for your family.
It's known as the dynasty.
a relic or a relic.
There is no such thing as a couche ki.
I'm going to do it.
Men, my children.
Men, when children are born, I don't know if I'm different.
No, it is a male genus.
I'm not a fan of a son named Devon.
I'm the only one who knows how to make your brother feel.
It's like a son or daughter.
This is a man's world.
I'm with you.
The son of his brother Yevon.
I don't know.
Why did you even say that?
Men, you are my family.
And then like yo ba o li as if i could take you to the new one.
I am about to be baptized.
I have come to be baptized.
It's just like you.
Are you or are you or who are you?
It's not easy being a child.
You will be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ.
You can't even tell me what's going on.
He was baptized in the name of Jesus Christ.
He is my son.
Frank is the wife of a man.
My brother is my brother.
I'm your wife and I want to talk to you.
It's not just me, it's you, it's me.
Either you have a child or you are baptized.
Conpè mwen, esi janfi, makouwen esi or you come madenman an, you gen ta do on titi siva yon zalyevou.
It's hard for me to be a father figure.
I'm not the same person as you are.
This is why I'm here.
This is who I am to my children.
They are the children of tankonfi epi.
They are the children of Tankonfi.
They are the children of Tankanfi.
I listened to my mother and the people who knew me and I wanted to be with the people who made me feel better.
They've been there for years, and they've been there for a long time.
It's on my chimman.
They turned their backs on me.
The men who are responsible for the deaths of their children are those who are responsible for the deaths of their children.
I'm not going to tell you about it.
It's a short story.
What's the point?
If I don't give up on myself, I'll give up on other men, I'll give up on myself.
A person who is willing to do things in front of others.
They're on the verge of extinction.
It's the people who make it.
People, people, people that don't know what they're doing.
Seyouyou dey people like la ou
People don't know anything about it.
and ap chiche
such as y ap chan trave ou wa e sa yon.
Who is a wine raider?
That's how I got rid of it, man.
There are many children who live in a bayou.
Wey, or are you a kid, rayi sa rayi?
One of them is still in Rome.
They're all right.
You are the parinman of the church and of the people.
I am baptized, but if you ask me, what will I tell you about my baptism?
I have many things to do before I can even be baptized.
Not only that, but I can't go back to the city, and I can't go back to the old days.
How can anyone be prevented from being baptized?
How can anyone who wants to be baptized, be baptized, or be baptized?
It's a little too late.
It's the kind of person who can't get enough of it, and it's the kind of person who can't get enough of it.
All men are equal.
I don't know if you're a confidant or not.
What's the matter with you?
It's just a matter of time before it's over.
The men of the manma pa pa pa know or se
Or know someone who is going to be a major player.
Now you can drink it.
A, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m,
I've got a lot of men.
A person who is better than you is better than you.
It's been a while since I've been able to do this.
If a person is in front of a boat, or a boat is in front of a boat, what do you do?
I'm going to go back to the drawing board.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm going to be happy.
I'm going to do the same thing I'm going to do.
I'm going to go to church.
There is no other way to do this.
I'm going to have a chapel.
I can do what I can to help her.
That's what I'm going to do, Gen Place.
I can be a good person.
Now, we're going to get married.
But we're not going to do anything that's more important than that.
There is no place for it.
or ap ap vizit la
and such as foun plase a moun lan
I haven't lived since the dawn of time.
It's the same generation of people.
Gen konn al pase
Gen ta pas and sivi nou same
The men who are in charge of the regiment are the ones who are in charge.
Please rise, and I will tell you that if you listen to him, you will do this together, and you will do it.
Yo thing pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa pa
Yo vinmi yo epi epi
Put on a man who is unusual and put on a man who is unusual.
How long have you been here?
I'm going to give you an order, I'm going to give you an order, I'm going to give you an order, I'm going to give you an order, I'm going to give you an order, I'm going to give you an order, I'm going to give you an order, I'm going to give you an order, I'm going to give you an order, I'm going to give you an order, I'm going to give you an order, I'm going to give you an order.
How long have you been here?
When a man marries a woman, he is the only one who can marry her.
You're going to have to learn to live with it.
I know how to put it in front of the lamari
How do you know who you are?
One man's right to remain silent is to be bound by a band to the contrary.
Gen dwa gen men
I passed the genome.
Everything I've been through is generic.
I'm not sure where to fix it.
If I hear your wife say that she is more than you, what if you want to know?
My wife, my ex-wife, my ex-wife, my ex-wife, my ex-wife, my ex-wife, my ex-wife, my ex-wife, my ex-wife, my ex-wife, my ex-wife, my ex-wife, my ex-wife, my ex-wife, my ex-wife, my ex-wife, my ex-wife, my ex-wife, my ex-wife, my ex-wife, my ex-wife, my ex-
It's the same with the way you're doing it, Matt.
Mouri or wine make everything good.
I'm not sure what to do with it.
I'm going to put it on my voucher.
Open your eyes to the world.
It's the only way to do it.
Whether you're a fan of me, are you going to do it any other way?
You are the one who has trouble with men.
The finishing touches on the finish line.
or vispe di li
Or am I going to Yanko?
This man, dead and gone, is dead and gone.
In French, everyone knows what you're doing, and you're weak.
Take, for example, the following example:
I've been searching for the people I've been searching for.
Do you even know that there are people out there who are willing to do things for you if you think they're wrong?
It's not about the people.
Do you know someone who is too long for you to relate to?
And if you deposit a person, where do you go from here?
What do you think I'm going to do?
I'm not sure if I'll be able to do that.
You don't know how to communicate with you or your family.
Who is rasanble l
The man who prayed for him.
What do you want me to do?
Do you know what's going on?
I know who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am, or who I am,
If you don't, you're not going to be able to tell a story.
I mean, am I supposed to be on a date?
If someone, for example, was born here, how would I know?
What about his son?
I don't have any other options.
When a person passes through something, everything or anyone else passes through something, there is a lot of disagreement, a lot of disagreement.
A person who knows a bottle of tea and a bottle of salt, or a person who knows something that is already in the bottle, is a new one.
Either the person, or the gene may be the same as the pitilye, epi, or fer, or achori.
I don't want to steal anything I can or shouldn't do.
I have sinned, I have sinned, I have sinned.
Yes, there are people who don't work, and people who work for the vanmisi, I know, Isai.
If I do, the essence of it is poison.
Anvenme, the apizye li.
I'm not going to eat anymore.
Well, I don't know how to express it.
Or is it just the two of us, or is it just the two of us?
I don't know what to do with myself.
Tankou lansou or besan or bon ka
A nice cup of tea or a nice cup of tea.
It's a good thing I've been searching for you.
When you find it, you can buy wine or two menus.
If someone I work with is you, who are you?
What do you think?
What is the order of Jan Asan?
Eson Yoon is one of those people.
That's what I'm going to do, Esouvel.
Either you take them with you, or you send them to the wolf.
A, jen jen mwen.
Oh, my gosh, my gosh.
It's either as if you are new or sent to you or kissed.
They're not there yet.
I'll tell you if it's too late or not.
or salye pou voye.
This is true even if it's broken or even if it's still broken.
rey men ok
How do you know what's going on?
I'm willing to accept the answer to my question.
So, are you ready to go alone?
He is not the one who has not passed, let him go to the depths of the sea.
Or you can't have one of the poorest people in the world anymore.
Rakon now knows where I'm going.
I don't know who you are or what you're talking about.
raze or raze
W pa so good or so raze or so know or so paspi le sa la
You can get something for now.
Or did we just have a few more?
That's what I want to do.
That's how I feel about you.
You or someone else can get away with it.
You won't win.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm going to celebrate my birthday.
I'm going to tell you something.
We've got a lot of work to do.
People like me want to travel.
Men want you to try.
Movlè antrave li
I know you're someone who can take on such a big thing.
There is a new paper for my soul.
I'm going to have to take care of myself.
I've been doing this for a decade.
It's a decade away from home.
I'm not sure.
I know the problem.
I can't tell you what to do.
It's been a long time since I was born.
I'm going to have to do something about it and I'm going to be happy.
Since birth, I have been passive.
I'm not sure what happened to Chevin, but he's fallen so badly.
An example of this is the fact that it's not always clearer than it is or that it's not clearer than it is.
Don't be afraid to call someone who's not there.
It's all about the new people.
They can't get away with it.
They can't get enough of you.
They don't call people names either.
A person is a person who is full of a.
How do you get people to work outside your home?
They're still here, aren't they?
What is the meaning of this word?
I can live here.
What happened to the men's side of Brazil?
I'm not responsible.
If I'm going to talk to you, I'm going to talk to you.
Men genius Bande 1 money soun li epi m bo or li epi
You don't have to spend money to be able to afford it, or even to spend money to be able to afford it.
There's a mouth at the mouth.
If there is a dispute, or a person, or property, or money, then there is a dispute.
By the end of the day, I can't touch it.
Where can I touch it?
Now I'm going to have to go through this before or until I get there.
In my first question after the task is completed, I will arrange for you to come to this section.
Okay, there's always something like this that's going to make an election for a new person, for a new person, Don.
I'm going to give you the exact same amount of money.
There are many people who believe that there will be elections for them.
Other than that, they don't even know who they are.
Don, I know how to handle all of this and how to get rid of you.
Like you can make a good bet or you will make a good bet.
As you know you've been there before.
It's a good thing you're doing great.
There is no good or bad luck in passing the bill.
You have to make a contribution to make your own patent.
They're not going to be able to afford it.
Who's the good guy who can't take a bath, right?
If you're a fan of the series and the things you're going to be doing for Katye, you're going to have to group up and do what you're supposed to do.
Cancer, I know you.
He didn't give a chak aney men al pran nan contributions, li an, li nan you li.
No one is going to be able to resist them, they're going to eat them.
If you're going to win, you're not going to win.
When a student arrives with a happy reception, how are they?
I was raised as a child and sent to school on my own.
Chak matè a member of the men's epi
I'm going to get out of here and I'm going to get out of here.
Children's men's epi
The men who reached the summit of Mt.
You have other children.
I've been to school for a long time.
The school colors.
It's called vinkala.
That's the way it is.
The key is to know what people are going to do about it.
There is no cure for the disease.
Take them too.
A child who is not in school is a child who is not in school.
I'm going to send you a recording to the palace.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
It's the end of an era.
The examination will be held at the same time.
I've been composing and performing in other parts of the world.
They want to see the other side of each other.
That's how I'm going to be able to put myself in a position where I'm not going to be able to put myself in a position where I'm not going to be able to put myself in a position where I'm not going to be able to put myself in a position where I'm not going to be able to put myself in a position where I'm not going to be able to put myself in a position where I'm not going to be able to put myself in a position where I'm not going to be.
I can't help it.
There is no such thing as a student's knowledge.
I went to school for the same reason that I didn't want to go to school.
The graph is given in the following table.
I can't drink the old wine.
It's not like I'm going to let you down.
If a man does not pass through this place, he does not grow, he does not grow, and he does not grow, he does not grow.
I've always known men in the classroom.
I won't be able to go back to school or anything.
They were better than all the men in the class.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to help you.
I don't know what you're talking about.
I don't know about you.
We are living in a civilized society.
Men and women have a lesson to learn from their students.
I'll be ahead of the curve when I die.
There are two lessons to be learned.
As a student, I did it.
Or, how do you plant your mother, how do you make her tea?
I'm not a good person.
It's not like I don't have a lot of time to think about what's going on in my life.
on dirilte a
He is the leader of my people and I know him.
I'm going to be in school for a long time.
Konn then describes an individual.
I can't put my finger on it.
I can do that.
I can't wait until then.
You can't do that.
I can't wait for the next one.
I took a test yesterday.
It's a bit of a shock.
The people who are standing in front of us are the ones who are going to make the most of it.
Once in a while, I'm going to be able to get my hands on it, or I'm going to be able to get my hands on it.
It's hard to tell if someone is going to be able to talk to you or not.
I know what I can do to help you.
It's not just me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me.
Whether or not you want to be with someone else or not, you need to be with someone else.
There are a lot of people out there.
I'm ready for the next one.
To make a person feel better about himself, to make him feel better about himself.
The person or two who sent the goods to the other person did not know it.
to the lapolis.
How do you do it?
But if I leave you alone, then what am I going to do?
Well, I'm sorry to disappoint you.
On the one hand, there is no one who can do it.
I'm going to tell them what I'm going to do.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
But we need to believe that we have the courage to believe that we can do this.
Li Fwon sweats himself.
I'm not in the mood for anything.
The people, on the other hand, have no say in the matter.
Everything is paper, they are paper too.
If you're going down, you're going down, you're going down, you're going down, you're going down, you're going down, you're going down, you're going down, you're going down, you're going down, you're going down, you're going down, you're going down, you're going down, you're going down, you're going down, you're going down, you're going down, you're going down, you're going down, you're going down
What can I do?
Benye boun can be seen.
The people who do the best for you are always looking for your job.
You know what I mean, you know what I mean, you know what I mean, you know what I mean, you know what I mean, you know what I mean, you know what I mean, you know what I mean, you know what I mean, you know what I mean, you know what I mean, you know what I mean, you know what I mean.
I can't wait to see you again.
Something to sell in a country that would be good.
I don't want people to buy a bottle of wine.
And you are the seat of the people who are royalty.
Yo fon jan la y entrar sé te domenga to buy wine vanm kareman
I don't know what to do.
I don't know who's going to do it.
I'm not going to lie to L..
How do you call someone who can take care of you?
Vòlè, fI bay vanpil kouchami, all the men of yon lè, Vjenès.
As you ordered Jan Ankan?
Man, I'm going to move.
Who is the head of the army and who is not responsible for all this?
Who, who, who, who has stolen the key to the swaj cheche for the arete?
And if you want to touriden yon Vanden
I'm going to have to wait until I'm sick again.
I've been waiting for you.
Take a long walk or take a long walk or take a long walk or take a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk or a long walk.
They didn't come back again.
Whether you are a man or a woman, or whether you are a man or a woman, you are a man or a woman.
Don't let the people who are responsible become the people who are responsible for the lives of the people.
I put them in prison.
I'm going to tell you a story.
It's not enough to kill a person.
And it's a lot of people's lives.
Somebody is supposed to kill me.
Kill the epi and kill the epi.
Kill the epi.
But also Sinon koupab epi
I'm going to take a look at the van.
Or he wanted to do something about it.
A friend or acquaintance can talk to you about the palm tree and how it's done.
That's what I'm going to do.
Or I'll tell you what to do.
I'm going to eat.
I'm going to do this.
I can't wait to see how you're going to film a movie.
I didn't know I was going to buy a new one.
I've always wanted to make a movie.
or sot pale m de
Since pla vasan
I don't know what to do with you.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I don't know where I'm going to end up.
They're going to kick their asses.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it.
Yo ap ann bi kachimou
I know you're not a vet.
I'm with you on the finishing line.
It's not just a matter of time before it's over.
I've always wanted to do something like this.
I've been to Finland for a long time.
Or you can use it to get rid of it.
The men will take you behind them as if they were going to do a number of things.
They'll be back again.
But if I'm going to do something special, I'm going to do it.
I don't know what to say anymore.
I've been fighting for a good phone number, and I know it's a good phone number.
There are about 28,200 tons of gold in circulation.
The Tibetan language is based on Letruyamè.
I'm from Ethiopia and I'm from Ethiopia.
There are three ways to win.
I'm going to do the same thing.
I've seen a lot of people do the first new thing, and I'm doing the second new thing again.
They know how to do it.
They are known as decabès.
I'm going to do something about it.
This is why I'm here.
Yo divon yo
I'm not even in my 40s.
You'll be able to find out more about the people in Egypt than you'll ever know.
Now you're on your way.
All the things that this man has done to you?
Conversely, if you like it, you can use a binary option.
I've been thinking about gold and gold, and I've been thinking about gold and gold for a long time.
I'm going to try to make it better.
If you want to do something new, I'm going to do something new, I'm going to do something new, I'm going to do something new.
It's not easy to hear a word.
You can't do that on the radio, you can't do that on the radio, you can't do that on the radio, you can't do that on the radio, you can't do that on the radio, you can't do that on the radio, you can't do that on the radio, you can't do that on the radio, you can't do that on the radio, you can't do that on the radio, you can't do that on the radio, you can't do that on the radio.
I have a mouthful of mouths.
to me or against me.
It's not about the words or the words themselves.
I'm not going to say a word about it.
Men are not men Divè
We're not going to be able to do it again.
My son is a man of words.
My son is in the bathroom again
My son is on the radio.
I don't know how many people are there.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I know I'm going to Wadam Bay and I'm going to heaven and hell and I'm going to hell and back.
Tansan w tansan w tansan w tansan w fè
They're not going to be able to get their hands on either the men or the women in the bathroom.
I'm very proud of you.
Li jou with peyè yo jou a kat la toujou
Do not give chak moun bon to make in front of the wap marque
Li said to Mary
It's not even on the screen.
Get married so you can have a good time.
Don't you want to get married before you get married?
So, how do you know?
I don't know if it's true or not.
I don't know how to deal with Bezi Nou
That's how I got everything at home.
or menmen men
I met everything at home.
It's time to move on.
They're not the only ones who win.
Now they know m
Or they'll know m
It's going to be a game of cat and mouse.
The new tooth tone of tanbou is capable of generating tanbou a.
On the one hand or on the other hand, a person has the right to hear.
And then there were the other two dancers.
It's a game of cat and mouse.
Who am I to say that?
That's the way it is.
If I dance, if I get married, if I get married, if I get married, if I get married, if I get married, if I get married, if I get married, if I get married, if I get married, if I get married, if I get married, if I die.
The thing is, I'm taking it all in and I'm going to get it.
Now I know what I'm doing and I can't stop thinking about it.
Do you know how to sing or do you know how to sing?
Konsri de chante se an fan sè yo konn chante
I know that you can hear someone who knows that you can hear their voice.
A fan or a sentimental person enters the world of music.
The kind of dancing or the kind of dancing that a person can dance to, dance to, dance to, dance to, or do the same thing to.
In a big way, yes or no again.
Genyen may, or konn ap dwo dwon.
Do you have long teeth?
To win or lose a tooth until a bit later, we have to take a toothbrush.
And against the odds in a bay.
And then there's the dance.
The people are simple lanmereng
It's good to have good teeth.
I've been listening to it for a long time and I've been wanting to dance.
Or a ton of other things.
Noun ramen nouwo nou konnyan nou
I don't want you to know.
This is why people dance in tachatcha.
The people of the country know what they're doing.
You're a long way from home.
Or a ton more.
M gen dans bolewo, de wò latya, vay.
Anpou condam put it in the bujou
They're on the verge of bankruptcy.
This is how Sanman rele anke anke sanman rele anke anke anke sanman rele anke anke anke sanman rele anke anke anke sanman rele anke anke anke sanman rele anke anke anke anke sanman rele anke anke anke sanman rele anke anke anke anke sanman rele anke anke anke
It's not like I'm a clown.
I'll give you a tip and you'll be under my skin.
In the mountains of the Bay of Bengal.
Musicians know how to play the piano, but they don't know how to play the piano.
I'm not going to say anything about it.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
There is no such thing as a man.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to do it myself.
Do you know what I'm talking about?
Bonj wèt sa a piye
I'm playing with you, I'm playing with you, I'm playing with you, I'm playing with you, I'm playing with you, I'm playing with you, I'm playing with you, I'm playing with you, I'm playing with you, I'm playing with you, I'm playing with you, I'm playing with you, I'm playing with you, I'm playing with you, I'm playing with you, I'm playing with you, I'm playing with you, I'm playing with you,
on retirement stand from isya
on the retirement of an ancestor isya
To celebrate your birthday.
Things I'd like to see happen in the world and I'd like to see them happen.
The other is holding onto the other and scoring a goal.
They're just trying to keep up with the pace.
It's not like I'm going to be able to keep up with what's going on in my life.
I knew I was going to be there for you.
I was born to overcome it.
I'm the one who got it from you.
I can't wait to get back to you.
I'm outside.
I'm going to end up outside.
to win or lose.
I'm going to put a tank of water on my way, and we're all going to get there.
I pray for you all.
He is a man of many talents.
They were born in L..
Balon, they're going to kill a man with a cock.
I'm going to cook.
You know everybody.
Nou a tout aray men mangadye a
It's a great place to stay if you only want to go to the beach.
I'm going to fight.
In the meantime, is everything going to be the same?
No, gen cook type gen cook country after cook type a, yo radi outro bagan anpan?
I don't know how to cook them.
They are divided into four parts.
Even if it is not high quality.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again, but I'm sure I'm going to be able to do it again.
It can be used to treat pain or discomfort in the stomach.
It's all right with them.
Or at least I'm not going to get a kick out of it.
or met others in front of him.
They can be the same person as you.
They can even meet the same calendar.
They make men.
Fala, I don't know how to cook.
Oh, come on, can't we just cook the other one?
I know, I know, I know, I know, I know.
Pran egizanm pou ou ap sook la before you and I fight with li
You can put it in front of the other bay.
You can't afford to lose weight.
Say what you want to say.
I'm not crazy about you anymore.
Thank you very much.
I don't know if I'm ready or able to have a good time with you.
I'm with you on this one.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
I'm going to continue again in order to get back to my husband.
I'm still here with you.
Okay, I see you, okay, if you're born against it, or until then, if I'm still in the process of changing, okay, don't.
You can take a cup of tea or, if you want to, you can put it on the back of your feet.
Contwayize through the net.
I'm going to try to make some wine, aren't I?
Do you know the salt, men?
To take the langag akook la, gen ti bay w kont fouye in the other head kook la, which replaced li.
Chiyoset, other than before?
Release the doll.
A series of cooks express everything they have to do to fight and men too much to know how to fight, not to say anything.
What do you think?
He or she will be before the bat cook, after preparation, before the ball is now, after a series of things, when will I meet the cook?
I don't want to hear it, I want to hear it, I want to hear it.
The bandye is not to be confused with Wa w w all the shortcut the tea
They're back in the game again.
Again and again and again and again.
A master or co-owner of a bank can transfer money to the bank.
Or money and choute jouye or sa w do this.
A kapabal language, or simply a language, is a language in which a person speaks or speaks.
People will pay you as much as $20 for Digoud.
20 dollars Adigoud tout twa w apv soov ap pran lè lè mwen.
On the table of Gabel.
Kout lan, or something like that.
Or do everything I can to make it easy for you to decree it.
There is no other way or decree.
Some people know that other people are doing this to them.
There are women's bouvare
That's how I knew I was going to be able to do it again.
They're swirling around.
It's not easy to do it.
They don't know if you're going to be able to do it or not.
What are you talking about?
Two, are the other chickens lost to you or are you going to take them?
Or is it just a matter of time?
or diploma.
or take things swal take an zamni
You're going to have to deal with all of the animals or things you're going to do.
If you're going to take me, I'm going to take you.
You know what to do or what not to do.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to take it anymore.
I'm going to take a look at it.
They can be used for a variety of purposes.
Or toothpick, or toothpick, or toothpick, or toothpick, or toothpick, or toothpick, or toothpick, or toothpick.
I'm here, I'm here for you.
If you know about bet la
Or you know about rin pose la esanpon or vinme
Or put something in such a way as to make it stand out from the crowd.
Yon la kol.
Pop, metan yon la kol, for what?
But things, animals and animals, are the same as human beings.
Thus, they will be able to pull everything out before the surrounding crowd, before they can do it.
If two, three, three, three, three, three, one, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three, three
On pran cont de blag.
What's the other one?
K ap bay blog.
If you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king, you are a king,
It's a story.
I don't know of any other kind.
I don't know what to say.
exyan y ap bay kont chante
And I'm not going to sing.
Yo bay kont chante
I don't know yet.
Men are men, men are men.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to finish it.
I'm looking for you.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything without the water.
I'm going to take it.
You can also take a sword with your choice and do something about it.
Everything else is there.
I'll be there for the next few days.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it.
You can buy them for children and make them at home for sale or elsewhere.
Yo gile l game
You've killed two people and you've gotten angry with them.
I'm sure you'll be able to play the game.
I can't wait to get back to you.
You're the one who's going to make the most of it.
You're the one who's confused about all these things.
It's all over again.
Li has completed his consultation with his consort.
There's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
Don't walk in the same direction as the men who run all the way in front of you.
I'm running everywhere I take it.
I ran in front of him with me to the door.
They're still there, they're still there.
Li Gon Other is also known by this name.
I've been waiting for you to come up with something.
I'm going to run away and do it.
on how to deal with it.
It's the same with men.
You know, I'm not going to say anything about it.
When the two children were born, they had three children.
There were three men in Benen before I chased them.
Or you're the one.
I'm in the middle of it all.
I can't help but wonder.
You have to be a man and if you want to be a man or woman, you have to be a man.
I'm going to tell you again.
If you want to go to Gonj wèt, yon gen nwa standing la with yon bay ay byen longs.
I'm going to have to live like this.
where a batch of relay plops are derived from.
There are several ways to do this.
I'll tell you what to do and I'll tell you what to do.
It's all in your head.
m gen bay
That's what I'm doing.
That's how I feel about it.
I'm going to do this.
If I have multiple genes.
I'm not going to say anything like that.
Men's cells are made up of men's cells.
It's always going to be about men.
If I were you I would send you after the others.
Release the pic.
Mabl will not be able to convince you to donate any more.
The wine is not the same as it is today.
Mab la vin nou.
Release the man.
Li yon gen is the same as the big big one.
They don't even live in the middle of the twenties or so.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
Jan Ankan is the author of this book.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to do that.
I'm going to tell you how much money I'm going to have to pay for it.
It's a very nice place to relax.
It's not like you're going to be able to do it again.
So only releases.
They don't recognize it anymore.
How do you know if someone knows how to swim well?
Anywhere Mablate Madisot took me or took me.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
You're the only man who knows what you're talking about.
I'm going to have a good party.
3 besides the Lord and the things of the Lord I am with you know player I am with you jwil
I don't know what I'm talking about.
Now you don't know what to do with the cabrit.
The people who are doing this kind of thing to you are the ones who are doing this kind of thing to you.
It's the only thing I know how to do.
I'll send you the way I want you to.
Men Kodomari and Sòomari are one and the same.
I'm going to make a sandwich or a roll of it so I can make salt and how to make it.
I'm going to make a ballast.
No game li gen dwa gwo an bout bou a so
There are two types of ploughs in Badani.
I don't think I'm going to be able to do it this way.
I've seen the good news about Abel, and I'm not going to lie about it.
I'm not crying again, sweetie.
The child's player is drawn to such a game.
I've been drawn to such an idea.
Women are more likely to be affected by men's health issues.
I'm so excited to be able to send you something like this.
I sent them the first time.
I'm going to tell you all about it.
One foot in the door and one foot in the door.
When I finally get it again, I'll send it to the second one.
I've been standing for two generations and I can't get enough of it.
I can't take it anymore.
I'm going to do the same thing for you.
Okay, like you don't want to do this, do you?
There may be many of you who are under the influence of the devil, and you may be tempted to do so.
And more and more, and more and more and more.
When it comes down to it, almost everyone who loves men, anyone who wants to get to Abon te bay zanpik, don't call me that.
I tell you, the woman who has the glizó or the two goats in the man's hand, how do you do it?
Well, if you're happy, you're going to keep going.
It's hard for me to know who I am on the farm.
I'm all for serving the bay, so why not?
He made a promise.
The other side of the story is that I've heard the other side of the story.
My service is either directed or directed to someone else.
It's the same with my service and with the cellist.
It's the only one.
Is there anything else I can do?
Who are the same men, even the tea?
We're not the only ones.
How do you know who is the head of a single-sex marriage for a man or a woman?
How many people know how to use it?
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it all the time.
If you can't do anything about it, you can't do anything about it.
It's not like I'm going to make a big deal out of it.
Alò, man, alò, se sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa sa
If you were a man, if you could not fulfill your duty, would you not be a man?
Manbon, the man who knows how to dance himself, how to sing.
Chwal li, immediately appa pale a, even with jan or li.
I don't know what to do with myself.
You're the only one who knows how to pack your bags.
There's no such thing as a man.
There is no such thing as a father or a grandfather.
It's all about the angels.
I don't know who they are.
You can do it.
Perisil sa can be a generic term derived from that term to the day of arrival.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I'm going to try to avoid it.
If there's anything that makes Count Kalbasi feel bad about it, it's a big deal.
If you don't, you're not going to win.
It's not a huge ton.
What can you call me?
If you're freezing, what's going on?
What are the other types of condoms?
Blan, Blan, what else did I do?
Vag ee Kita, toukè toukè Kita, what else did I have?
Van Wagon, take the other one, for Blan, to see you or I'll leave you.
Two kilos of acorns.
Gran konn ap chante or gen lwa lwa ap chante la
There's nothing wrong with that.
sing a pral fini men
Everyone knows about one person.
I've always wanted to know about Abobo.
It's a great way to get to know the people around you.
There's no such thing as a powder soup.
I don't know you.
I know you're the same as me.
They know where to go and they know where to go and they know where to go.
They can't get to a new location.
That's how I'm going to do it.
For example, they are capable of acting as if they were in a good position.
As if I'm going to look like someone new.
Is yon ki jan rele man sa?
Yon dyab, yo relay.
Echonche, or va, yo wa hearing chonche?
People like lap fonse things or don't know what I'm doing or what I'm doing.
Why or who is doing this?
When a person has a baby, for example, they can hear a lot of things about the doll.
I know I've heard it.
Well, like the man la yo.
Or where I'm from.
They don't need to go overboard.
It's all part of the entertainment industry.
They don't need to sell tea.
I've always had such a hard time.
Oul di a, you don't have to be a good person to do this, you don't have to be a good person to do this.
It's the same person, and it's the same person.
I don't want to kill someone who has done this to me.
You're not the only one right now.
yon al temèri pis pis
There's a lot going on.
These include:
I'm fine now they're fine now.
I'm not sure if I want to do that.
Another time when two people don't even know what they want to know.
The mission of the mission is to do the best they can.
I know how to do this.
Do you know what to order?
It's like a phone call.
You've got someone who's been around for a while or two.
Or do you want to know when I'm going to tell you something I don't know?
Do you have an anonymous copy?
An, there are two recipes.
One of them is coming.
They're trained under the same roof as you.
I don't think anyone knows what to do or what not to do.
I'm going to make sure you're ready for it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
Someone from someone else's side of the family has to listen to me when I'm done.
I can't wait to see them.
They are priests or priests.
If I'm going to do something good, I'm going to kill someone.
In the end, I'm going to have to get some gold and make it into the men's room.
I'm behind the scenes and I'm looking forward to it.
Fiy a pa avle epi
There's nothing I can do about it that's going to cost me a lot of money.
I'm going to make sure you're doing the right thing.
That's why I'm here.
Or, in the case of a team and a man like you, in the case of a team, in the case of a team.
It's not like anyone else is going to be able to do it.
Pi kounya or ale an affair with li
They're not going to drink wine again, or do it again.
Or else I'd like to do it again.
There are many others.
Se sa only kno yo
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
I don't want to drink wine again so I don't have to eat a card.
No, for example, I'm married to many men, but I'm married to another man.
If I do this, I do it because I serve another man, not my love.
WI, who's kissing my card?
But, as if they were married to someone, they won't take me, they won't get in touch, they won't get married, they won't get married.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
A man doesn't want to lose weight.
I'm not sure where to start.
Jan wèt yo rele
It's hard for a woman or a couple to do something like that.
There are a few things like this.
It's just that I don't want to be alone with you anymore.
I'm not sure who I'm talking about.
The people and ap chare w.
It is possible that you are a human being.
For example, li gen dwal la
All of this is going to make you feel like you're a trival.
Sil fwon ti ba a la
People who don't want to celebrate birthdays don't want to run away.
I ran away.
They'll either say it or do it.
There's no such thing as pancakes.
The person can play the game on a promise other than that.
That's what I'm going to do.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again, but I'm sure I'm going to be able to do it again.
You're coming here at the right time.
App to each other and to other things.
This is a new generation.
There is no account.
The people who live in the world are the ones who live in the world, and the people who live in the world are the ones who live in the world.
Se louga or wou
Ap se louga o wou s
Everyone who is born knows who he is.
Re louga or pwodi ap moun lan.
For example, if you are a man, you are a man, but you are not a man.
It's either a person or a person.
Take a look at what's going on.
And then I fell down to make the garden my own.
But if you don't do the right thing, you're not going to do the right thing.
Do the right thing.
Bon kiswa l takadi l
They did a good job.
A man whose name has always been in the business of working with him is the only one who can help him.
I'm not going to lie or I'm not going to lie.
Or the rest of the day.
When it comes down to it, it's important to know what you're worth, if you know what you're worth.
It's worth it.
Or you can do something about it.
value, or thing, or deed.
Do this or do more.
On fan se or koura yo?
Or work for someone else.
It's the only thing I can do.
Law or order directly from
Gen 5 has nothing to do with how you work.
It can be used as an example of a tea or wine bottle.
The sun shines on the wine, either under the feet or something like that.
Now I can go back and start over again.
It's the only way to do it.
Ap pari midi
How does someone work to make money?
Calculate the time and work ahead of time.
I'm going to eat it.
Koujan w renle people m sa a, people ki vanyan.
I'm going to go with you.
They're not going to be able to finish it until they're back to normal.
It's not like I'm going to end up with a lot of problems.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
As a child, I'd like to see you again, and I'd like to see you again.
If a person who owns the mangoes, sends them to take them, they will not be able to take them.
Even if I walk to the right.
If I send you a right-handed message, you will also receive a right-handed message.
Or someone who has a job to do it.
If I'm going to live the same life, I'm going to live the same life.
I have three foundations for you.
I'm going to be able to swim.
Evil animals are anything but very serious.
I'm not sure who I'm referring to.
I'm going to have to do my job, or I'm going to have to do my job.
If you're too busy, you're too busy before you can do it, or you're too busy to do it on the couch.
Now that the plaque has been installed, I've been doing it for a while.
At a certain point in time, I'll be there.
It's a race against time.
Who knows who they are?
And when the end result is a work in progress, I'll leave it at that.
Or is he lonely?
While I'm at it now, I'm at it now.
Mwa prepoze w.
This is why I live in the Queen's palace.
For example, I have a lot of new things to do.
There's a lot of work to be done.
While we're all in the field, we're doing the same thing.
I'm not sure.
Whoa, so that's how I know?
Ab ban m conkou.
Do you know what that means?
Can you explain to me how I was born?
Is it now, now, now, my dear?
How are you doing now?
Where am I now?
Do I have to work?
What kind of work is that?
What else can you do if you don't know each other?
How do you know the rest?
We're going to meet each other again.
It's always the same in the same direction.
How do you even begin with the end of a sentence?
Starting at 9 a.m. and ending at 3 p.m.
9 to 3 p.m.
They will arrive sooner than they do in the next generation.
It's something that should be released sooner.
What's the other way around?
Early arrival, or the gen pi early?
Is it still a problem, or is there another way to find out who is going to be king or who is going to work again?
Eowonn, you don't know what you're talking about?
Now, I don't know what to say, but I'm sorry.
You can find Panye in Panye in such a way that you can find Panye in Panyeal.
In the meantime, I'm going to take a look.
I'm going to have to put my head in my pocket.
All the soups are the same size.
Raffles, everything in the world, that looks like a raffle ankon, Dyakout, me rele releasing people who know up Kay.
A person who is content with his or her own beliefs about Ebenis promises to win something or do something about it.
Whether you want to get married or not.
I'm going to try and do this.
It's just like the ante.
This is the same as the equation a.
I'm sure you'll like it too.
I know what they're talking about.
There's no such thing as a fine thing.
I've never been able to do anything like this before.
I'm retiring as a coach.
There are so many ways to do this.
They've put a lot of pressure on you to make sure you're on the right track.
It's the only way to get people to do it.
Evonvantay Gennebag such as lasi m ta fonne weyaj swan and other as swan
I know a marine tool.
I'm going to put your tab on it.
How many men have been able to clean the valve?
the ap valope l
I'm not going to take the tab.
I'll take the tab and tell you what.
I'm going to do this.
I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do
OK, that's fine, it's just that I don't like to fall into a trap.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
Jan releases for the first time.
I know a lot of people who know how to make a map.
You can't or won't do that.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it.
It's not like he can't even remember the end.
Or blessing him in the end.
There's always something you can do about it.
If I do this, how will I be able to do it?
So, if they are so good, if they are so good that they know how to deal with you, how do you deal with them?
If you don't know how to do this, how can you do it?
Falop, how do you know if you're a man or a man, Chabon?
If Chabon were to be made together, who would make Chabon the same, what is Chabon?
You can also make Chabon yourself, koto or reti yo Chabon an.
You're going to have to do the same thing.
I'm going to call you crazy.
fou nou chabon
There's no way I'm going to know who you are.
up to p ap lafin an
Ap exit from the outside.
It's not like I'm going to release the bouchon.
konchabon pa yi chab
The earth will be laid on another lake.
Cons or kite l more or less
Li Sodi and Li Bon Pou Ale
There is also the Potalon, which can be used to create a consensus on the coat.
I know you're short men.
I'm so glad you're both here.
I'm still waiting for you.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
In the same way as in the case of tea.
That's what I'm talking about.
We can't afford to lose weight, even if it's too much.
And then there is the anger, the anger, the anger, the anger.
I'm going to be angry with them too.
Even if you don't know how to buy or sell, you don't know how to buy or sell.
Some of the twenty-four men had a short time to think about what they were doing.
The people are cold and men are cold.
They know what they want to do, and they know what they want to do.
I'm not going to let you down.
Pedals Pedals, cars, cars and other vehicles.
If I'm an idiot, how can I do this?
I'm here to help you.
Do I call you the only one in the room to write a letter, or a letter?
Well, before you or me, is there anything I can do about it?
The Lord or the Horse?
We want Christ to do the same.
I don't trust you with that.
You can meet or have a plate where you can do something about it.
I'm going to do it.
On foot se l.
and ach twon tou
It's very clear.
I'm going to put something in there and I'm going to do something about it.
Well, I've been doing this for as long as I can remember.
And that's all there is to it.
What's the big deal?
I am opposed to luggage carrying on your feet.
When someone is in a situation where there is no end in sight, then there is no end in sight.
I'm going to make a living.
Clicking on them is the same thing.
They don't know what they're talking about.
Do you have any problems?
Gen sou lye konn gen mann ti bay in front of an la
Li le yo can seou le yo benzan seyè li
I'm back again and I'm back again.
I'm going to try to keep the clutch on for a long time, and I'm going to try to keep the clutch on for a long time.
How do I get to the bottom of my soul?
How do I get rid of those who know how to climb up and down the stairs and get to know each other?
and re-released by Mason.
How to get rid of people who know how to make your pen.
How to get rid of people who know the same thing.
How to get rid of people who know the same thing.
I know you're right.
I've known a lot of men.
Men are men, men are men.
Such men do good things for you.
I can't wait to see what you guys come up with.
Gain of the people to know one by one can pwifè range vye chodye l
I don't know what to do with myself.
It's a good thing to go out and do both.
I can't wait to see it.
I also know how to call someone like a plumber.
I don't know how to light a light bulb and tell you what to do.
I don't know if you'll ever know.
Some people are able to load the car into the rear wheels.
If you want to know who or what people believe in you, then any of those people who win will be able to bring it to you.
You're either a man or a woman.
or in the face of adversity.
An anti-inflammatory thing is all that is needed.
Everything is the same everywhere.
Pitl lap anbou tou tay.
Come on, you're calling someone who knows Kannari as well, aren't you?
Do you know?
How do you do all the barter with you that you know?
Yo ba rele yo potti, no.
I'm going to do it again.
You can win for kachon bay for now.
How can you win or not?
Sen Good, is there anything else I can do to make them drink?
The thing is to put on a mini-let but I'm going to put on a bottle of wine at home.
I want to get the money in the pot.
There are many things you can do when you close your account.
I'm going to tell you about Bokit.
I don't know anything about white.
What do you mean?
For those of you who don't know people, how do you feel about Bokite, mamit, who do you know who you know?
So, what's the point again?
I don't know how to measure in a bottle.
Grann bag sa yo
That's why there are so many great things to do in the garden.
You know how to measure.
Why not again?
There's no such thing as a new generation.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
I'm not going to sit down and talk about it.
Now the pan kond seze is another great thing again
Do you have another month to go on a vacation?
Didn't the Lord take it from you?
So why am I here?
You're the only one who knows what's going on.
Do you know what you're talking about?
In the meantime, I know you're still in the middle of something.
You've got to be clever about it.
One of the great men and the contrary are at the expense of the other.
One of the panels protects me if I fall to break.
If I were you, I'd break it down.
It's not like you're going to fall.
I've always wanted to do something different, but I've always wanted to do something different, and I've always wanted to do something different.
I'm not sure why I'm here, but I'm sure you'll be fine.
I've been buying it for a few months now.
Don't worry about it.
I can't afford to buy something like this.
A few months ago, we had to buy one so we could afford to buy one.
Such as pa t at ou bien lam
I've been thinking about it so much.
That's how you're going to get the job done.
That's why I'm doing it.
I'm going to do a lot of stuff.
People come and buy as much as they want.
So I bought it.
Why do I need so much money to put my money where my mouth is?
I've met many people who don't want to go to the bathroom, and I've seen other people who don't want to go to the bathroom.
What's the matter with you?
The next day is the day of your birthday.
I've got a lot of people coming and going.
I'm not going to go back to the drawing board.
I'm on the road.
I'm going to have a good time.
Klòd jan fils.
It's not the first time you've met someone, or you've been through a lot.
Don, on the same day as Diwanyan again and in the same way, I'm going to post or even tickle you, on a series of other ticks.
I still don't know if I'm going to answer or I can't.
I'm ready for the next one.
The edition of this or even the edition of this edition will be taken from you, as you can see.
Whether a bay zanm or the ap li tay zanm ap tanbe or wheat, or wheat or a vide piton.
Whether you're a man or a woman.
Or the tank or the real thing.
L ap degray
I'm still new to the app.
The video is also new or li m.
I'm in the mood for a new verse.
tot as si or gen tan or vid
It can be a fancy network or a child's network or a new fancy network.
You can watch or watch videos.
I don't want people to live in a place where there's no one else.
I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you.
If you want to know more about things.
I'm going to tell you about it.
The people, the bagit and the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people, the people
It's worth it, but anyone who's never paid for something like this will get it.
If anyone pays me, I will pay their debts.
Or fin ache in men or men, or fin ache men zanm.
If it's for men or women, is it for men or women?
And it's like you're going to get a lot of anti-inflammatory effects.
Are you coming?
Akri anen rele.
Then, in the same vein, there is more to it than meets the eye.
E men, renkoum ante l?
And then people ask me about it.
Altee, what's your phone number?
Despite the fact that there are so many of them, how do you know where they are?
I don't know what I'm talking about.
There's an angel, there's another bag.
And with that, you'll be able to buy a new one, a new one, a new one, and a new one.
Bè sa yo good march.
If you buy from the sea, you'll be able to speak from the sea.
We kissed underneath his face and kissed him in a confit.
It's not like I'm going to make a mistake.
For the twonfiti men's competition.
under the menmi la kou
There's no such thing.
You can sell it or forget about it.
Write a poem in the form of a poem, and then write a poem in the form of a poem.
I'm very happy with what I've accomplished so far.
They want to know what's going on.
Apenn si y ap an yon digrid bouba a la
I'm looking forward to the next one if I'm going to graduate with a bachelor's degree.
The media is very much in love with what you're doing.
Lache k abrit la nan moun la
Many loved li grebal family well che
That's who I'm talking about.
I'm going to tell you about Wabi
This is the first Wopen.
As a person who takes an interest in a particular subject, he or she is responsible for it.
The king took the seeds of his anger.
I'm not even going to tell the king.
One or two people will buy the goods before they can do it.
The people who buy food from the people who buy everything have lots of milk and milk.
One of the two cities, or the Krest Keb Ponk gate, has the right to buy goods and services.
People know that I don't often use lanpin lanmachin, or gospel as a verb.
It's one of those things.
They bought a balance sheet.
I bought the right one.
It's the end of the world.
They know how to sell and they know how to get ahead of them.
It's up to the buyer to buy it.
You will also be able to sell too many other things, including the ones you buy.
It's not the same.
Men of men all over the world are either alone or in the company of other men.
It's the same with Patik lan.
Men and women around you.
Or go ahead and make a phone call.
No matter how far or where everyone passes.
Chebèt has passed you by.
I'm going to go through it.
Other than that, you'll be able to live life to the fullest.
Everything is all that is all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all that is good and all
They don't know what to do.
Kezi m will know
Now, there's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
You're not going to be able to do that.
You're not going to be able to do it.
anima or ap aret
I'll ask you to leave my phone number if you don't know what to do.
I'm going to do what I want to do.
I'm not going to postpone it.
You may or may not, for example, think of someone else's mind.
Once again on yon as bares yo li pou kar al otro bon
When I was a kid, I was a kid.
The vote is as good as it gets.
I'm not sure if I'm ready for it.
I'm going to take a look at it.
I'm going to take a look at it myself.
Bag again yon as m dis m
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it.
I can't help but wonder.
It's not just me.
It's the same thing.
For other bars.
I'm going back again.
I'm a big fan of that.
Yes or no?
If you want to use it, you can use the solvent or solvent.
or gen pou machan diz
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
I'm not sure if it's worth it or not.
Stand up and be counted.
Toujè no ren renē yon men machine boat
Rennen yon machin question contra on anderen or well kanmen yo gen li chavire bay sa a.
Bon cheval for the party bay Xap
Or will a place
Make a great horse before you can climb up to the top of the ladder.
I've met your daughter and her whole family.
And how can you know that there is no salt and that there is no penm bourik
Yon koube chwal kanmen m
Or because it's not like that.
That's because I'm not here right now.
Jan wè di san fankan
In the meantime, I've been able to escape.
It's also a great way to get to know each other.
It's not like you're on your own with something or you're on your own with something or you're on your own with something or you're on your own with something or you're on your own with something or you're on your own with something or you're on your own with something or you're on your own with something or you're on your own with something or you're on your own with something or you're on your own with something or you're on your own.
Such as sa k divan chòl la la
If you're going to do that, you're going to have to do it again.
There are two ways to keep them together.
What are they creating?
For the sake of life, I'm going to use you to do something I'm going to do to you.
I know I've met him behind my own back.
What's up with you?
Elan pou an animal like la
Or at least now they're talking about it.
I can't wait to get married.
I didn't get to meet the head of Liatè
What do you want to do with Beth?
Flante everything else to the side of the Jaden.
The pi t and conviray sa yo
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
Now that's what I'm talking about.
That's why I'm here.
There is no equation for or against the equation.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
I know how I met her.
If you can do it, you can do it, and if you can do it, you can do it for others.
They're not as good as they used to be.
Many of the people who work for them are taking advantage of it.
I have a good night's sleep.
and the generations of those who work in the De Matye field.
Pa chante men
Gen or gen on something or can do something.
I don't know what to do with myself.
There are no men.
I can't wait to hear it.
The thing is, do I know where I'm going, where I'm going?
What else can I do, what else can I do?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
And if you want to, I'm going to have a cup of tea.
I know how long you've been here, how long you've been here, how long you've been here, how long you've been here, how long you've been here, how long you've been here, how long you've been here, how long you've been here, how long you've been here, how long you've been here, how long you've been here, how long you've been here, how long you've been here, how long you've been here, how long you've been here, how long you'
I don't know black, white, white, we don't know, we don't know, we don't know, we don't know, we don't know, we don't know, we don't know, we don't know, we don't know, we don't know, we don't know, we don't know, we don't know, we don't know, we don't know, we don't know, we don't know, we don't know, we don't know.
I'm sure you'll be able to use two of these to get past the bottom, so you don't have to worry.
The plan for the ton of luggage contained in it came with a big package of the same size.
I'm not going to say it's a good idea.
Water is the same as water.
There are so many things to plant in the garden.
Since they've found something.
The great men of the village are worshipped.
It's always the same with water.
Or you can't plant any of the same things.
They don't agree.
The plant is not consumed.
They take everything and pull it off, they make it easy for you, they make it easy for you.
There are two ways to wash your face.
The demon knows a lot of things.
It's the same with men.
I'm going to the canton.
I've always wanted to do something different.
It's like trying to get a tip like that.
You can't buy a bottle of wine or a bottle of wine.
They can work.
There's nothing wrong with that.
I'm going to try and run the men's race.
You can pull it all off as soon as you can.
I've never had a job that I wanted to do before.
Why or how do you do this?
When it comes to marketing, in order to get all the information out of it, how much or what do you want to do?
It's not like you're going to die.
Or take it or leave it with your luggage.
I can't bring myself to be a beast or a beast.
You may be able to take a concession or apply for a secretary's allowance.
Take everything you need to know so that you can put on an onj san like a series on your soul and your soul and your soul.
Or cover it with tea.
There is good wine in the world, there is good wine in the world, there is good wine in the world, there is good wine in the world, there is good wine in the world, there is good wine in the world, there is good wine in the world, there is good wine in the world, there is good wine in the world, there is good wine in the world, there is good wine in the world, there is good wine in the world, there is good wine in the world, there is good wine in the world, and there is good wine in the world.
Either way, there is no such thing as gold, silver, gold, gold, and silver, and there is no such thing as gold.
For those of you who are younger than me to get married, it's your turn to get married.
Yo gen for a
I'm for a good cause.
Before I plant a plant and drink a cup of tea.
It's because I don't know where I'm going.
I'm going to try and make it.
as ordered by Jan.
Yo dirab or re
The log on the tea is basically the whole of the contacts or tijan or wo
Or make it easy for you to use the app.
or plane pitimi
Or do you want to take a plane ride?
or priye tou.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
In the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden or in the garden of Eden.
ben t ap now li
Or fonse debagay or or abye yo.
As if it could be reconstructed.
Ty anen denmen
You know the portrait of the plant mariou metel nan 3 twa li tou avon two li nou
There's nothing I can do before I show up.
It's not like they're going to be able to keep up with you.
I may be able to make my own edè yo fin m cut o kant lògade o
Li can't light a candle in a garden, and he can't see the end of it.
I'm going to do this.
And if you raise two cups, or leave all your cups at that, or withdraw your cup.
Do you know how to cook?
M gen, m gen kokkoye a yo.
Or do they sound like that?
The end of May and the end of May.
ban w or fin
It's either one or two.
We're going to do it again.
I can't wait for May to ban you.
One good thing I can tell you, why are you here?
For example, when the mission is completed, you can remove the ladenme.
Who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who, who,
Now, I'm going to talk to my mother, and I'm going to talk to her, and I'm going to talk to her.
If you're ready, if you're ready, if you're ready, if you're ready, if you're ready, if you're ready, if you're ready, if you're ready, if you're ready, if you're ready, if you're ready, if you're ready, if you're ready, if you're ready, if you're ready, if you're ready, if you're ready, if you're ready, if you're ready, if you're ready, if you're ready.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
I'm going to retire from Zepi, or I'm going to give it to you.
It's hard to believe that I've done something like this before.
Others have retired in order to make a living.
I'm going to tell you a story.
That's why I'm here.
And grenn may, sa k poteze pi may, even with a relay.
Keep your hands to yourself, even when you're crying.
There's a lot more to it than that.
I'm very happy with the way things are going, and I'm happy with everything.
Or do you want me to give you everything you need to know?
It's all about you.
Well, if it's now a bay bay, why do I do it sooner?
Je te fèy, apre sal fèy.
When I was a teenager, I felt like I was going to die.
You can also sign a letter of intent on the water supply and the water supply.
When everything falls down, there are times when people can't even cover it.
It's not just me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you.
Ka bezyon Keyi or
or lam lan.
I'm going to have to wait a long time.
You can put on a load that you can carry.
I'm sure they'll never get out of bed.
Yes, I know, I know, I know.
If you're one of them, you've got to get in the water, and you've got to get out of the water.
It's like a branch that's been there before.
You can do a lot of things that you know in a branch of your business, such as when people are happy and happy.
If you are the one who knows how to speak
Depis yo fan to make the remedy
Kichan or rede yon men.
Manche and Bwa, one of the most famous of Kenbe water limes, is Tonbe Janmide Limer.
When a demon catches a fish in your mouth, you can't eat it.
Kenen, such as Zabò ka be mango, or ka keyi li, such as l banm.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I can't wait to keep it that way.
I'm not sure if I'm going to keep it that way.
It's not like I'm a coconut.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it.
It's good to be back.
Or ren right now.
There are men who are willing to give up.
My son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son, my son,
The key is to make sure that you never miss a thing.
You can have the keys.
And of something like a mango.
A cold and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold, and a cold,
Or you can go to the mango tree.
If you're behind your back, you'll never be able to keep up.
It can be like the tou sa an m.
It can be now or later.
I can't even remember what happened.
Everything is yours.
I can't wait to get to know you.
I'm so tired of it now.
I'm not going to let you down.
So, how many mangoes do all the branches of mangoes have, and how do they grow?
I don't want to be the only one who can help you.
It's like taking a new one.
I'm going to tell you a few things.
You can take a new one.
How can I be a man like that?
I don't know, I don't know, I don't know anyone.
Tankou cut off a bunch of cloths now
Or you can pick up a series.
or retrieve a series.
There is a great deal of grenn together.
Don't do it or remember a first
Or you can take a second like that.
Konmi grenn is not together.
What can I do when I fall, or when I fall, or when I fall, or when I fall?
Don't waste your time in your garden.
I don't like it, I don't like it in the garden, I don't like it on the water.
How much water, so much so, so much so, that flows through the middle of it, how much of it flows into the bay?
In the middle of the tranche, where the water passes, there is the same river.
Don, in the middle of a big tranche.
The tank is capable of holding water.
A desanjis all the way down to the water table.
Men can or can't know anything about water and can't hear anything about it.
Or even if it's the only thing I can do.
Or I'm going to have a lot of fun with all the old gardens.
How do you know what's going on?
I think I'm a cascade to your Nan
I don't know how I'm going to cope with this, but I've been waiting a long time.
You've made your debut in the big leagues.
The grapes are grown in the vineyards.
on the same day as the opening of the canal.
Or the finest thing I've ever done.
In order to take it, I'm going to have to spend a tranche like this.
on the tranche.
I'm going to tell you one thing.
I'm not going to say anything like that.
I can do everything with this kind of tea.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
Why do you want to make tea?
What do you know about it?
or fin body or tranche
Or do something like that.
Or like water a
It's not like I'm falling into another tranche.
I can't wait to get to the plenary.
How do you make water?
Okay, everything, like the dwal la, or do everything like the dwal with a roar li.
I'm sure you'll be able to answer my question.
The men are going to be in the valley.
I'm going to have a pill in front of me.
I'm going to call you a nun.
Ap m can fight as you go.
Because it's the only way to know who you are.
I can't help but wonder if there's an explanation for that, right?
I'll keep an eye out for you.
Keep the grenn an
One way to get to the bottom of it is to get to the bottom of it.
What's wrong with you guys?
If I keep the pill together, what do you call it?
Balen kok, an, ekonsan yon rele l?
They're still the same.
There is only one kind of knowledge.
What kind of people do you know about us?
You know what I'm talking about.
You're going to be fine.
The sixth generation is still younger than Zoway.
I'm almost exactly the same.
But it's not the same as how it can be.
It's too generous and even bigger than that.
It's not too much.
and zoway nan
Men are the same.
Yo gen dwap rije
It's a great way to get started.
It's the same way.
Kouk sa sa sa a
It's not the same as being in the same room.
Some people say that it's a good idea.
It's the same with the release of the single.
We all know what we're doing.
It's hard for anyone to know what to do.
Some people are the same.
I'm not sure if I'm going to release it.
I can't thank you enough for your kindness.
One foot is exactly the same as the other foot is exactly the same.
They are made of the same material as the granite manifesto.
Two pen, two sa, two granza, don't make a big granite, there's a big granite that you don't need, you have to use it now.
I'm going to get back to you right away.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
It's not the same person.
Now I know who I am, and now I know who I am.
It's time to get back to where I am now and get back to where I am now.
Donk or gen dwa trap pou w a or as rafre chitou li.
It's nice to see how many of you have met today, even if it's not the same.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I'm going to be the same as you.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
from other parts of the country.
There's something else going on up there.
Grenn and I took him to me.
I'm going to take a pill with you.
It's the same thing, and I have a lot of them, just like you, Zannemann.
Why don't you start eating like this?
Yon pye zanmann.
How are they going to get behind the wheel?
They're going to wake up.
So, you know how you are, how you are.
Kijan releases it in the same way.
I'm not sure if I'm going to win the race.
How do I get rid of them?
If you don't know the name of the company, you'll need to know the name of the company.
How do you get rid of me?
If you have 200 pills, you'll be able to use them for a long time.
Why is it that we don't want to be like the rest of the world?
Pye, tell me, before the man's soul falls, how do you know he's still alive?
It's all over the place.
When you're ready, you're ready to go.
It's great to be here.
What do you think I'm going to do now, Cain?
If you look like him, then you're doing the right thing.
Can you tell me what it's like, like a photo of a man, what's wrong with him?
What do you mean?
Well, look, two gouch sa men, but do two, two pi jan ley, and there is a big foot, a pi jan ley youyen.
Well, when I look at you, I'm here, I know where I'm going.
I'm happy with the way things are going, and I'm happy with the way things are going.
Then you can do what you want to do next.
It's what you do and it's what you make of it.
Li amen amen if you want to know about it.
It's not a man's fault.
I know the plant li
I went straight up to the water and there was water in it.
Now I know how to do it.
I know how to make gold and how to make two men.
I know the things I know about plants.
such as fouye tou an
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything like this.
Or krenn nou make me up your ass.
If it's good enough, it's too late to take it, but who can take it?
One of the men who wanted to show me the men.
I can take it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or leave it or something.
What kind of people do I know?
I can't wait to get to know you.
Men and things to meet in a bay to know about men.
I'm going to give it a try.
They look exactly the same.
I'm going to take it.
The men were set up around their brothers and sisters to talk to each other.
They're not going to get up on your ass.
What you need to do as a consular worker.
They look like men l.
They look good, they look good, they look good to take for Mazoubèl, but there are men who are good at it.
Now I know how to get to the bay of Babel to take a spear.
Don't take it or leave it alone.
If you win, you win.
I'm a fan of what you're going to do next.
I can't wait to get to work with someone else.
How do you get rid of them?
One of my favourite legends is that I know how to use it.
They've made a lot of mistakes.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
Or I plant the plant.
What I'm saying is that I'm not going to be able to do it.
Yo origon ti ke an and m
I know that there is a problem.
I know my dad from Finland.
It's the only way to die.
They're all men.
It's something I've always wanted to do since January 1st.
I'm not the only one who can do that, I'm the only one who can do that.
There are seven great men.
Gwon ti baga yo konn vlan
I know why you're here and I know how to be gentle with you.
I know how to do this in a sweet way.
Grann tou piti
I know how to make a table by table.
Or if you count grandmothers, they'll come to you so that they'll be there for you, they'll be there for you.
Or you know the garden especially when you plant a plant for example.
It's not like I'm going to be completely out of the window.
You can take a series to be able to put it together.
They are able to communicate with each other.
It can be cleaned in such a way or in such a short time.
Or two lunches or something like that.
How do you get to the post office?
What is the meaning of life, ben rejenn?
It's the only way you're going to get the job done.
You want to put it on now if you want to put it on again.
It's the same with you.
It's the same thing.
I know I'm going to be with you guys.
They don't even know what's going on.
They're going to make you fall.
I'm not going to be able to keep up with you.
They're not done under the teas.
I'm going to make sure they're on top of it.
I've been thinking about it for a long time.
I've been waiting for you to get baptized.
They make the same wine as the others.
I'm not going to laugh.
It's not like I don't have a mouth.
I'm going to do the same thing for you.
I don't know about you.
Ya men a men
They are the same generation.
Do it now, or I'll take it from there.
I was able to put grenn nifè under my skin a long time ago, a long time ago.
It's been a long time coming.
It's been a long time coming.
It's been a long time coming.
Do you have such a good knowledge of what I am saying and how I am doing?
Do you want to hear it, or do you want to hear it?
Do you know what I'm going to do?
Well, how do I get there?
Well, van lotti does exactly the same thing.
Kresyon anmen soun are legal even now in the same state.
Even then and now I know how to wash myself.
I used to live in a flat bay now.
Kitchen releases are the same.
There's water in it.
They're good to know, they're good to know, they're good to know, they're good to know, they're good to know, they're good to know.
Gen yon even yo m pa know pi yo
I know I'm going to do the same toilet as you for Sere yo a Isaiah
How can you make them feel sorry for you?
Jan and Lee are the same.
It's a good one.
You're the only kind of person I know.
I don't know what else to do.
I'm not sure what else to do.
If you're the only one of your kind I know, here.
I've always known how to play the league.
It's all about you.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm sitting here and I'm waiting for you.
It's hard to believe they're so close.
I'm not sure what to do with it.
Yo sa boyite ou gen 2 mès Wa rele order jan li the same so rele l
It is good for the stomach and intestines.
It is good for my stomach and I do not believe or believe that I am now dead.
And how they are called by the same name.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to pull this off every day.
I put it on now or the next day and it's too late.
Kaltik al yo
I'm going to kill you.
There is a price to be paid.
I'm going to tell you about the next generation.
I know how to use it.
There are many things about men.
I know what I'm talking about.
I know that there is one thing I can do for you.
They make people feel good about themselves, and that's how they do it.
In the context of my brother, I know this man.
It's so short.
You know men now.
Now I've heard a lot about it.
It's not about the men.
They don't have to eat sandwiches and potatoes.
I know what it's like.
I know who I am and I know who I am.
Do what you have to do to get rid of it.
How do you look like a man?
Don't be afraid to call them the same way.
I don't know Adam, but I know everything about you.
You've got a team, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a
Grenn Bagay knows how to make the most of it, and he knows how to make the most of it.
I know how to make a source.
I know how many times they've been there.
grapefruit or kale li
Or something or something that is rented by someone who is not a source of them.
Yon ba yon ti fwon ti grenn kou
They want to look like a.
as Seldado a
with men.
There's a lot of money to be made in drinking.
and pay for the tranche.
This is not a new generation.
I can't wait to see what happens next.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
Li gen dwan pi ke or men m
I don't know what I'm going to do.
I don't know how I'm going to do it.
Pi jan men li dedenye l.
If you don't want to live in a place where you don't have faith, you don't have faith, you don't have faith.
The man who knew Christ was in him, because he knew him, because he knew him.
I know there's no such thing.
Others have made a connection with the British and Irish.
It's a place where you can even put a letter.
Li yon tijan feels good about me.
Men are born with the intention of cooking.
The result is that we have a lot of things to do.
I even know that I'm sure of it.
Do you know what to do or what not to do?
I was born with a disability.
It's what you're supposed to do.
Or do you have something to do?
I'm going to tell you something new.
I'm going to tell you what to do and how to do it.
I'm going to tell you this.
I'm going to knock my teeth on Yo alede amwaz
It's the same with Anne or Le.
I'm looking for water from the Kalbas.
It's going to be a good one.
I'm sure you'll be able to find it wherever you want to find it.
Yo up kay and api li touj.
When I put it in, they give it a pounding, and they eat it.
I'm going to write a letter of amen to get back to you.
I've always wanted to write a letter.
I'm going to dance with you.
They're like brothers.
I'm sorry to hear about you.
I want to change a few things.
They were born to be men.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
That's why I'm here.
Flè lonjan wouj flè lonjan wouj
I know you're crazy and I know you're crazy and I know you're crazy and I know you're crazy and I know you're crazy.
And I'm going down to the vineyard to make a van.
So they even know what to do with the people behind the scenes of those who have been pushed down the vit vit vit vit vit vit.
It is God's will for us.
I remember when I was a kid, I remember when I was a kid, I remember when I was a kid, I remember when I was a kid.
So how do you know that I'm the same person?
Well, I'm going to tell you about it, and I'm going to tell you about it.
Even if it's still there, you don't know how to get rid of the pump, you're going to get rid of it.
There's no such thing as a two-way street.
They're just a bunch of people.
I'm going to have to go back to the drawing board.
How do you know they're the same?
You're going to have to do it all three times.
One thing I know how to do.
I know you're going to be with me.
They're the only ones who know what they're doing.
I think I know how to drive a motorcycle.
If you're cold, you're cold.
The people who knew him live in the city.
It's not like I'm doing the same thing.
I know how to make you eat long-lived vegetables.
I want to do everything that I can.
I don't know what to do.
I'm going to do what I do.
M pa wè
I don't know what I'm talking about.
Do you know what I'm doing to you?
Or do you know what I'm doing more than that?
You don't know what to do.
You're going to have to go through a lot of things and then you're going to have to go through a lot of things and then you're going to have to go through a lot of things and then you're going to have to go through a lot of things and then you're going to have to go through a lot of things and then you're going to have to go through a lot of things and then you're going to have to go through a lot of things and then you're going to have to go through a lot of things and then you're going to have
You know what I mean.
You know that I can be more powerful than you and that I can be more powerful than you and that I can be more powerful than you.
But now I'm the only one who knows what I'm going to do.
I know they're selling the same thing in a brand new way.
Or that you don't know a woman like that.
And how many of them are the same.
I don't know about you.
Any two coyotes don't do the same thing.
I know how to use it.
Anywhere else, such as putting me in my brother's room.
It's been a long time coming.
It's not easy to take them.
What's up with you?
There's one thing I don't need.
I've been looking for a new batch of potatoes.
People who are under the influence of men.
How do you get rid of men?
I'm not going to let you down.
It's the same as it ever was.
As a result of this, there is a high degree of confusion.
I don't want to let you down.
Whether I touch it or not, I'll get out of there.
What kind of pilot do you know, what kind of weight do you know?
It's not just me, it's you.
Two of them are the same.
One thing to do is to make a decision.
W wè ap radye like frave l la pa w
A lot of people have died, and there's nothing left.
Moutèv, moutèv, gen yon menm, as mwen pa gen yon la, li gwo li fwon tiflè yon jan jon kouwoprèske kouwi sou wouj.
There is no room for men and women.
I know how to take a flè sa
I don't know what I'm talking about.
It's good to be able to scream.
I know the plate and everything about it.
How men relate to men.
in chouv la
That's a very good thing.
I'm going to do my best to get out of here.
There's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
Sa ran a la
When you're against the rate, you've got to do what you've got to do.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it any other way.
It's also a long way from the other side.
I've been waiting for you guys.
Pi san blak okor is so good.
They're going to cut their heads and make the code clean.
Li, you don't know what you're doing, do you?
Now they're going to cut off their mouths, and they're going to cut off their mouths and they're going to cut off their mouths and they're going to cut off their mouths and they're going to cut off their mouths and they're going to cut off their mouths and they're going to cut off their mouths and they're going to cut off their mouths and they're going to cut off their mouths and they're going to cut off their mouths and they're going to cut off their mouths and they're
I know the finest men in the world.
I know what it's like on your phone, I know what it's like on your phone, I know what it's like on your phone, I know what it's like on your phone, I know what it's like on your phone, I know what it's like on your phone, I know what it's like on your phone, I know what it's like on your phone, I know what it's like on your phone, I know what it's like on your phone, I know what it's like on your phone.
Nan, my boss, a, okay.
Se menzi for fey la yo la, pou ken bo, or la va, men.
If you know me well or you don't know me well or you don't know me well or you don't know me well or you don't know me well or you don't know me well or you don't know me well or you don't know me well or you don't know me well or you don't know me well or you don't know me well or you don't know me well or you don't know me well or you don't know me well or you don't know me well or you don't know me well or
There is no doubt that there are two men.
It's as if they're walking underneath me.
There are two ways to do this.
It's not about men.
It's been a while since we've seen it.
It's not like we're going to make a big deal out of it.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I'm with you.
I know how to take a rasin but I'm wearing clothes.
I'm going to wear trep kleren.
It's about people who know what they're doing.
Or do you know who he is?
If you don't know how to climb the stairs clearly, but if you don't know how to hear them before you do, you're going to have to.
I'm not going to say it's a good idea to make a big deal out of it.
They're in the middle of it all.
I'm going to do it.
I'm not sure I'll ever be able to make it.
I don't know what to do with them.
Men, men are to live a life of self-sacrifice.
When a man is born, a woman is born, a man is born, a woman is born.
As if they were in the same shape.
Who are the same people?
k ap ten l.
Why am I even trying to prove it?
I'm going to tell you, man.
I can see you in your shoes.
If you're looking for something, you might as well be looking for something else.
I've been thinking about it for a while now.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
They think they can or can't.
They're in the middle of it all.
Li chan devèmi l yon sa a
Or I'll tell you the truth.
I'm going to try to figure out what's going on.
I think they're going to pick it up.
They are good for cooking.
People can be people and things.
I know where you are, I know where you are, I know where you are, I know where you are, I know where you are, I know where you are, I know where you are, I know where you are, I know where you are, I know where you are, I know where you are, I know where you are, I know where you are, I know where you are, I know where you are, I know where you are, I know where you are, I know where you are, I know where you are, I know where you are, I know where you are,
Well, you know what I mean, you know what I mean, you know what I mean, you know what I mean.
switankou people Ta ansèt la
I took them.
I'm going to throw the baby away.
I'm going to tell you what to do and how to do it.
They'll let you know.
Who are you?
They're doing what they're supposed to do.
Look at the picture and see how it looks.
Here is a picture of you.
It's not like I'm going to call them.
What do you know about Pharaoh?
I know a lot about it, but I'm not sure.
I, like this, am going to take a vacation.
Or maybe it's not like that.
They broke the bread and fell to the ground.
A person who knows more than a child or an animal like everything else that he or she thinks about.
It's been a while since we've had a glass of wine.
Kichan releases the same kitchens.
It's not like I'm going to say a word.
I'm not even sure what to do with myself.
I love people who don't like it.
I know now that I'm too young.
Don't worry about it.
I don't know.
You can't do that on a regular basis.
It's not going to go away.
I'm going to do the same thing.
One thing I'm going to do.
There are two ways to do this.
There are two ways to do this.
Tijan an Nwen End
Get or make a map of what is or isn't going to happen.
He made them into a shape that I enjoyed.
Whether they win or lose, they will cry out to you.
Yon jan san non when
I'm going to tell you about the gas.
I'm not going to lie, I'm not going to lie.
They want wine.
I'm going to sell it like this.
I know what I'm talking about.
It's not like I'm going to let you down.
Mwen, orijanm fè, kichan w rele l, pòf pòf, kichan pòf pòf, why do you know what to do and how to do it?
It's good for women, it's good for anyone who's sick, it's good for you, it's good for me, it's good for you, it's good for me, it's good for you, it's good for me.
Gen yon yeah yeah
The phone rings.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
They're good for the heat too.
It's not like they're going to be able to do it.
How are you going to treat men?
I'm going to take my mother's hand to you.
It's not just me.
Like you and me.
It's the first time you've seen it.
I'm going to do this for you.
You're not going to be able to do that.
Even if you're like that, you've got a lot to do with your life.
They're all the same.
Li never gave an Elevator on the other side of the bridge.
I'm going to take a look at this one.
I'm going to kill them too.
How do you get rid of them?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
But then again, who am I to hear, like sowife, like sowife?
There is a fridge I know how to make and li
They also make them big.
I know how to do this.
I know you've been there before.
I'm going to make you do it and I'm going to make you do it again.
or recommended flè a yon jan joun.
I've done things like this two years ago, especially when I was a teenager, but how do I know what I'm doing?
3 I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I don't want to be with you anymore.
There is no other way to do this.
We're going to have to make a decision.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
You'll be able to hear them.
There's a lot of things that go along with being a fan of chouk chouk.
You don't have a coupon like a chouk like a pouch or a riton.
I can't live without it.
I also know how to make a short cut and I want to give it to your baby.
Li konkou anti chapò sou on his own
It's not just me, it's you.
The men came to see him.
I'm going to tell you something else I'm going to tell you.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
There are a lot of great men here.
It is the same water that can be used to make a baby.
I apologize for remission or passing the time you've been through to ban everything I've been through.
I am satisfied with my life.
Sa banch cheristen
This is how I am satisfied with what I have.
I am satisfied with my body.
I'm satisfied with the way things are going.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
Yo chan anise
After I'm done with the conversation, I'm going to talk to you.
I've never been able to get to know you before.
Nouk pran y ap reponnn detwatikisyon mwen la bavre
Yo chan anis fa example si yo man
How does it work if Bet Pi only knows Bet Pi?
Bétri Asri I'm going to make it look like the one.
You are against the people who do the same thing.
I'm not sure if this is the case.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything about it.
They don't know what they're talking about.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
How do you know?
Do you know how many animals are there to kill, or do you know how to kill them?
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
De plase al tout a tou.
How did you want to do that?
Or watch Libèt la bette ta for a lot of things in the same way as the pou Bèf ou.
What is the meaning of life?
Now that I'm done, I'm going to throw in a cup of tea.
If you don't want to go through the back of your head, go through the back of your head.
It's a bit of a shock to me.
I'm going to tell you what to do next.
That's why I'm here.
I'm sure you'll be able to keep your mind together for a while.
I was able to meet you and your friends on the boat.
Or I'll tell you what to do.
I'm going to kill you.
Female animals, on animals that serve as males serve as females, how about you?
Or do you know?
I don't know, or a beast like that.
An animal that follows its mother again and again gives birth to a baby.
It doesn't have a genome.
They don't have a lot of time.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
on young animals.
Animals are not yet developed.
It's great to be able to do everything for people like me.
It's a big deal, but it's not a big deal.
Chatre, for the animals I eat, for the animals I eat, for the animals I eat, for the animals I eat, for the animals I eat, for the animals I eat, for the animals I eat, for the animals I eat, for the animals I eat, for the animals I eat, for the animals I eat, for the animals I eat, for the animals I eat, for the animals I eat, for the animals I eat, for the animals I eat, for the animals I eat, for the animals I eat, for the animals I eat, for the animals I eat, for the animals
Now even a large number of cells can be used.
It's like having a session.
vayagtab or i ap vole so do other
There are no more than 45 others.
I've never been able to relate to your animals.
Is this the Bookle too?
Am I the same person?
When the mother of the beef takes it, she makes them believe it or else they're all dead.
I can't get enough oxygen to give you a drink when you're sick.
Sweet daddy for you.
I don't know a lot about it, but I've heard a lot about it.
Do you have a tooth, or do you have a tooth, or do you have a tooth, or do you have a tooth, or do you have a tooth, or do you have a tooth, or do you have a tooth, or do you have a tooth, or do you have a tooth, or do you have a tooth, or do you have a tooth, or do you have a tooth?
May, is the time all right?
Just as you want me to do, I'm going to do it my way.
They're on the right side.
It's because people don't like it.
I'm going to release it.
Parajanm ki like ta ton kochon la
They've got a little bit of hair.
I can't wait to get an epi
It's the first thing I'll tell you about this antidote.
Kouchon ap rele rele la pou pou pou faire l conjan soufè l la
I'm going to try to make a living off of it.
I'm going to call you a cow and give you a baby.
One way or the other.
It's not like I don't know.
It's easy to make mistakes and it's easy to make mistakes and it's a good example.
It's not just me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you.
Li yo reyen si so men
Or you say gazelle.
It's not like I'm going to be able to pull the trigger.
Now you know what's going on.
Who knows?
It's not like they're going to make a big deal out of it.
I'm not sure what to say.
Either you're out of the country or you're out of the country.
I'm going to get out of here and I'm going to get out of here and I'm going to get out of here and I'm going to get out of here and I'm going to get out of here and I'm going to get out of here and I'm going to get out of here and I'm going to get out of here and I'm going to get out of here and I'm going to get out of here and I'm going to get out of here and I'm going to get out of here and I'm going to get
I'll never see them again.
I've never been able to tell you that.
Or I'm going to sleep.
I'm going to the beef concert.
I've been up so long.
Either way, I'm a fan of it.
It's the way of the world.
The moun kourans yon boul gil al
I've been doing this for a long time.
You've got a lot to say.
Or say or say a van of beef.
I don't have any children.
I'm selling them and I'm trying to sell them.
It's almost like a la.
At the end of the day, I'll be able to show up at the end of the day, or at the end of the day, I'll be able to show up at the end of the day.
It's just the way it is.
One thing I know about Beef is that it's the same with me.
I'm going to give you a link.
I've always wanted to know what to do with myself.
One of them is a cow.
I don't know where the priest is, but I know where he is.
I'm going to take a bath.
They're going to have to pay for it.
Kill the beef and I'll kill you.
Li gen matris beef la
She finally gave birth to a baby and swallowed it up.
You're just as stupid as you're supposed to be.
You're going to have to do something like this.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
I've been waiting for you.
w b alakonn up sovel
It's up to you to call it a day.
This is why we are here to help you.
I will never see my mother again.
They're too big for the office, and it's hard to believe.
There's another animal that knows how to do the beef.
It's not your fault.
I'm going to tell you what I can do.
I'm going to tell you about a man named Kapat.
Don't order again
I'm not going to say frankly, but I'm going to say goodbye.
My grandmother's two cows.
The book is full now and you can see it now.
Now I'm going to do it.
It is now being renovated a.
La di beef conni gen yon sa.
Since the morning, the right side of the beef has been on the right side of the beef.
That's why the head of the beef is better than the head of the beef.
The men went to such a warehouse and went down so quickly that they were able to buy the beef.
There are other names for Magou's letter li.
The metatarsal is the metatarsal of the metatarsal.
The gene behind the beef is too long to kill the beef.
I'm going to do my best to make a living.
There is no doubt about it.
Gen yon ti an an an an an an an bef la, yo ken an an an an, gen gen someone who loves an abannannann ba y suitou.
I don't know what to do with myself, do I know what to do with myself?
Gen yon the same kind, even yon limon, once a man, once a man.
Is there a bouncy tea or a bouncy wine, or are you the same menmenmenmenmenmenmenmenmen?
I kill the good and the bad, I kill the bad and the bad, I kill the bad and the bad, I kill the bad and the bad.
It's the only way to go.
Bet la yo kou sa
I've already bought it.
It's either good or bad.
Or they'll buy a baby shoe.
It's not a baby.
It's time to buy it.
Now, if they don't sell anymore, then the Beet can buy one for sale at their own expense, and they can sell the animals.
People, other people, me and my two-year-old son-in-law, buy animals to kill in a milk carton.
But, you know, I've always wanted to know how to call a man.
Lef kabra, the beast of men, but not good, when I'm old man, an, an, an, and a man, poor.
You may even be able to find it within a mile.
I'm going to die before I die.
This is a typical type of genital warfare.
They're not going to be able to do the same thing.
Black people still believe in it.
Anne's face is the same.
They are the men of the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
I'm here to help you.
One siteut in the service of our people knows how to kill the mother kabri
Li chan konn killed a kiyèn nou bouk
I have a lot of respect for you.
Alan is the first person in the world to do so.
They know how to do it.
Li Konn gen yon like la won ban kabe
I know a lot of people.
It's like I'm in the middle of something.
There are other ways to do it all.
As if I'm in the middle of a party, I'm in the middle of a party.
All praise is due to him.
I can make it easy for everyone else to follow.
I don't know what to call an email.
If you're a spider, how can you say you're a spider?
Thank you very much, but if you don't know how to use a condom, you're not going to be able to tell me anything.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to have children with my grandmother.
They don't want to be on the receiving end of anything.
My mother and my mother.
How do you release a?
Are you ready for something?
Do you want to buy an area or do you want to buy it?
Did they eat it, or did they eat it?
The jaret does not come from a cochon voyisit or also from a man's pallet to kill a cochon.
It's a good idea if you're ready or not.
Since I was a teenager, I've been a jerk for years.
They know the same water in the same lake.
Blad picche, la yo twile cochen an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an an
Mach tonnes of water flow through the valley.
I've been retired before.
You're the only one who can do it.
Release, in your own way, to the world.
He told Woseyide things as if he had seen a pig.
I don't know what to do with myself.
It's been a long time coming.
I'll take them with me.
They didn't want to cry anymore.
I'm going to do it all over again.
I'm going to the console.
I'm going to make a concert.
I'm very happy with it.
One day I'm going to run to the bathroom and give birth to a baby.
I'm going to run for office.
They are the sons of men.
Kon jwon chwal everything expressè yo prepare l
Enstwil everything like l tannou who moube zwen up
I don't know what to do with myself.
I'm not going to bring anything else.
How to do As Bren Wimen and other types of Chivalou know how to hear anman
Chivalou and Wa never heard of it again.
li horse bereng
I've heard about it before.
They're going to kill us even if they don't.
I'm going to take a look at everything.
I'm not going to be able to keep up with what's going on, I'm going to be able to keep up with what's going on.
Now we're going to do something about it.
They're also so young.
I know my brother better than anyone else.
There's no such thing as being so good to Micho.
They are the same as Noah's Ark.
Yes, but I'm not going to tell you the same thing.
Save your life for the next few days.
Saved me from my bad habits and how I'm going to survive.
I've got a lot of work to do.
I know things to remember.
Before you know it, you've got to do it.
I'm not sure how much I'm going to do.
I'll never be able to breed again if the animals are not able to reproduce.
The fact that they have children is even more important than the fact that they have children and that they do not have children and that they do not have children.
I know the light is coming and I'm going to put the light on and I'm going to reflect it.
There's a lot of light in there.
Barit li pa gen lòt non.
to retire and to be able to recover Prasiwo a lè
I don't want to get caught up in this kind of shit.
I don't want to do anything like that.
I can't help but wonder.
You can also practice a practice.
Li sove diva to do myel la
I'm not sure if it's a good thing or a bad thing.
I know I can do it.
I'm going to try to find a way out of it.
You can't beat the others by bringing them to an end.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it all the time.
It's the only thing I can do.
But that's what I'm talking about.
I'm going to tell you.
I've decided to go through an overhaul of the network.
It's the same or different.
It's not like we're going to be able to do it.
It's not like I'm going to make a mistake.
I can't help but wonder what else I can do.
How do you do it?
I've been listening to Kenbo for a while now.
how or how to release sa
It will either be doubled or doubled.
Or will chiche the beast of Izab in the double.
I'll tell you what I'm going to do next.
One mout li y al lapèch yo, kak kren Bebèt yo pi jan rele yo men.
Yo y al lapèch.
We don't know how to talk to men.
Release the mariners.
Maren, there are too many people here again.
I'm not going to call you again.
Release me from prison.
On the water, on the water, on the water, on the water, on the water, on the water, on the water.
I'm going to eat.
I know I'm a sinner, but I'm not.
Prason rap week you're going to.
When you hit the water, you're not going to be able to hear it.
It's one of those releases.
I've been waiting for an angel to walk me through the water.
It's the same with heaven.
I was born and raised on the waterfront.
Men are not born with men.
Men are men, men are men.
I've been skiing for a while, haven't I?
Men, rile, what's the reason?
Men, if you have such a good reason to retire, who are you, and who are you?
Do you want to retire or do you want to retire for good reason?
What do you think about it?
I mean, you don't have to worry about fish getting into the lab, even if it's for you.
I'm sorry you're late, but if you could cut it all together, you're so small, you'd even cut out the cookies.
Is Sevare the one who eliminated Lapyari?
Wa konn dande pale of Silapya la
I know you're a man.
He knows Silapya la
You'll either drink it or you'll get it.
I'm not sure how much I'm going to get.
I know what it's like to wake up.
I've always been fascinated by tanks.
I can't wait to hear you again.
I know you've been there before.
I'm not sure I'll ever be able to do it again.
I'm with you on this one.
Then Janis l'ap still continue with the same question and question.
It's not like I'm going to be able to go home.
Or put on this or that thing.
There is a series of animals that are now entering the world.
I'm a mother chatter.
The same child, did they eat or drink?
I, too, am so proud of my son, and I am so proud of him.
Genes in animals are also known to have such a large cell mass that they can be absorbed as a single dose of cocoa or as a single molecule.
I'm going to double down on the drawing board.
I stood there to make a baby out of an animal, and the mouths of the people glotted at their mouths.
Don't call the animals you've forgotten or don't know what they're talking about.
I don't know if I'm rapping or rapping.
Or do you want me to recognize you?
such as being able to work or be able to work or be able to work or be able to work or be able to work.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything.
There's a lot of work to be done.
I'm going to do what I'm going to do.
It's just as easy as cracking.
You're so screwed up.
Do you know who they are?
That's what I'm doing.
I'm going to do this in Japan.
Bet Bet bet sa t ap up some la
It's not like I'm a motherfucker or a motherfucker.
I'm going to tell you about it.
This is the first time I've heard of Manm.
Zandorit and M are the same.
It's a new way of doing things.
Thank you very much.
I don't know what it is now.
A mantra that is now a mantra.
They know the mantra of the papacy.
It's the same thing with animals.
It is located in Mawoka.
For those of you who don't know, I'll give you Pye, even if it's mandan, li mandan, rye l, or Pye.
I've met you on the branch of things there.
I'm going to do it.
I'm going up and down the stairs.
I'm sure you'll be able to see the black hole.
It's not a nightmare.
In the meantime, they're coming.
But you, you have so many feet, so many feet, so much so, that they look like you, but even like you.
Lot's generations of the same size and size are so small, they are so small, they are so small, they are just as big as they are.
If I wanted to, I would have been able to put the wine in the bay chan, just like it was.
I'll tell you what, well, I'll tell you what, I'll tell you what, I'll tell you what, I'll tell you what, I'll tell you what, I'll tell you what, I'll tell you what, I'll tell you what, I'll tell you what, I'll tell you what, I'll tell you what, I'll tell you what, I'll tell you what, I'll tell you what, I'll tell you what, I'll tell you what, I'll tell you
I'm not sure if I'm a man or a woman.
Or the animals of men.
They're bigger than the fly.
There is a lot of support for them too.
There may be two generations of men who are either male or female.
It's like a birthday party or something.
They are the same person.
Gen yon is the same.
I've got the ability to walk when I can, and I've got the ability to walk when I can, and I've got the ability to walk when I can, and I've got the ability to walk when I can, and I've got the ability to walk when I can, and I've got the ability to walk when I can, and I've got the ability to walk when I can, and I've got the ability to walk when I can, and I've got the ability to walk when I can, and I've got the ability to walk.
They're also green.
They won't be able to keep up.
You've got to get it right in the first place.
They're in the big picture.
Li toukmi and
It's not easy.
How do you know that Tibet is not the only country in the world?
Tibet is going to take it, or Gandal is going to kill it.
I know that I am going to take you and I will not send you.
Chak konnwon bann the two and Bèt salè leswa of tou Koukouj
And now you're taking pictures of yourself.
There's a little bit more to it than that.
Beasts and animals will be able to take a picture of everything they have, but they will also be able to take a picture of people.
If you want everything you ask about all the beautiful you even where you are.
They ran for a membership.
I'm not sure.
When you're in the same boat, when you're in the same boat, you're in the same boat, you're in the same boat.
A, I'm going to make a man gen dwa continue three.
Well, it's a beast, but the same men know your cabrit, Paris is another beast too, pou.
They look like a bunch of people.
There are many ways to get to know people.
They continue to do so.
It's like you're doing your dad's job.
I'm going to do a little bit of that too.
It's the only thing I can do right now.
I know what I'm talking about.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm going to kill you.
I'm also a bit of an asshole.
I am the one who does everything you do.
Before you know it, I'm going to give you a break.
It's the same animal.
Even if it's only a few minutes, it's only a few minutes.
You're the only one who knows.
Or an animal like that.
I'm not familiar with it.
I've been waiting for you.
If you want to be a part of the cremation process, you have to be a part of the cremation process.
I know how hard it is to run men's races.
Gen yon ki pi is still used for l
It's a lot more than a flame of fire that can be lit on the people.
It's all about the kids.
I have read the Psalms and the Psalms.
There's nothing you can do about it.
They're too green for two.
Either way, I'm not a councillor.
It's good to be back again.
I'm with you.
Some other species of fish or of humans have a choice of hunting for their own animals.
You know me well enough.
I'm going to explain it to you, and I'm going to explain it to you, and I'm going to explain it to you, and I'm going to explain it to you, and I'm going to explain it to you, and I'm going to explain it to you, and I'm going to explain it to you, and I'm going to explain it to you, and I'm going to explain it to you, and I'm going to explain it to you, and I'm going to explain it to you, and I'm going to
Just like you.
Even Yon, they now know how to live and thrive.
There is one color, one green, and one green, and one green, and one yellow, and one yellow, and one yellow, and one yellow, and one yellow, and one yellow.
Or see everything I've heard.
One goulè gre
Under the same blanks and tires take some time.
They are colored yellow, so they can sing the same gas as palm trees.
Don't worry, there's a lot more to it than that.
How do you know if there's even a bigger business column than the one you're looking for?
He is a man of many talents and a man of many talents.
The color grey is the color of everything.
I'm white under a blanket.
I'm not going to act like a kid.
Is there such a colour, or such a bright red colour, that there is such a colour, frosty brother?
Now I know how to sing.
Men are singing a series of songs.
I'm in the mood for something new.
Se conta fli tou and ban a series of ti songs
If you're not familiar with the song, you'll be banned from a series of songs.
I'll sing you a song.
There's a lot of good music in there.
I'm not going to date the concert itself.
What are you doing here?
The color gray underneath the vent is almost white and there is a black spot underneath the chak.
The back of the head is yellow and the color is good.
Pichon nou mwen, pichon nou two when a tibouyou can tibouyou can.
Do you think I'm going to drink pepper?
Nan, what are you doing?
Then, there is the sonsèv piperit lè.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
Yep, you're both very sorry.
They have a green color and a yellow color, and they are grey underneath, underneath, and dark yellow.
If you're not there, you don't know what you're doing.
It's the same with other people.
It looks very much like Azebable.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to prove it or not.
They're the only ones who've ever had a baby.
They don't even have a yellow color on their face.
They sing preske just like zebablé.
I have chosen Mabdon as my choice.
Li nich ak zel yo like peace bable yo
Currently, they don't like to do anything they don't know.
It's not like I'm going to make a mistake.
It's also the only way to get to the bottom of it.
It's hard to believe they're coming.
It is as if Babylon had been destroyed.
You've got to eat bigger and bigger.
Men are not too old.
I'm going to make a point.
They are even closer than the peers of the Zebable.
It is the color bren such an Odòl yo, preske Blé.
Li preske tou blan under the vant li
Li yon great tach jon is in front of chak jen yo
Such as Zéba bile bile se yon ti jazo
It's too late.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
I'm not sure if this is a good idea.
Or they know how to use it.
They want to be a part of it.
I know you know what I mean.
I've got other animals, but I've got people, and I've got people, and I've got people, and I've got people, and I've got people, and I've got people, and I've got people, and I've got people, and I've got people, and I've got people, and I've got people, and I've got people, and I've got people, and I've got people, and I've got people, and I've got people, and I've got people,
I've been doing it all the time.
Since then, men have taken up volunteering.
They picked up the phone and gave it to me.
They've made me jealous of them.
One of them is Briy.
That's the way it is with Briy.
The men who are now underneath me are the ones who have been killed.
I'm not sure if this is true.
There is no such thing as too new to know.
Kote, how am I supposed to know where I am, Kolobri?
What do you mean, caliber cante a?
What is the caliber of the song?
It's all about you.
They even have a black-and-blood green color.
They're underneath the black hole.
Everything is not reflective.
wouj and other beautiful colors again.
The bottom of the box is either yellow or yellow.
I'm sure you'll find a way to stop it.
The feminine genus la
Women and girls are always on the same page.
How do you know that Jason is a good man?
Well, even if you have many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many, many,
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make a big move.
How can I help you?
People who are interested in your work can find out what it's like to live here.
In the case of Kadim Lan
It's not about the kids.
If you can't win, you can win.
You've got a lot to do.
They've got a lot to do with the fact that they're a fly.
As a young man, I wanted to be able to fly.
It's been a long time coming.
It's a long way to the top.
They are safe.
In the same way, they were also in Germany.
Li yon gen ti yon seyou of you tach
They've got their heads mixed up.
The cells are long
I'm one of those people who creates things in the middle of nowhere.
Men aren't too much of a threat.
It's easy to get up and do the same thing.
The men's season is coming to a close.
Li kadesann jis an bay isit.
Yo, that's so hot, or the promoute passes again.
You'll have to choose between them.
My son is white.
I'm going to put a child under a blanket and a train on his face.
If you're interested in them, you'll find them.
It's a great way to get a clearer picture.
I can't believe you're in the classroom.
They've been around for a long time, and they've been around for a long time.
He knows how to make chairs, chairs, chairs, etc.
And you're going to be fine.
Li gen yon ti koub was born.
Li fwon ti kub so down anman li
It is a short-term care plan that has been developed under the auspices of the Department of Health and Human Services.
Li yon rail white on chak jil
I'm going to use a diesel engine.
There is a white mark on the face of Devan, there is a pink color, there is a tankoumen, and there is a yellow color.
There is a black color on the front of the head.
It's the same color and shape.
There's a lot of grass under the school.
Donk, don't even call them names.
The genus has the same color as black and yellow.
I'm going to take a lot of pressure on you.
They don't look the same as the old ones.
The same can be said of the man who was born.
It's not that easy to do this.
They know their full potential.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
And then there's the old one.
They know what they're doing.
I don't know how to tell you.
How do you feel about it while you're at it?
Yo pa ren lè, yo pa gen gen lòt nou?
The two of us live together, and the men are so beautiful that they know how to cook.
It's not like I'm old enough to know better.
They're doing their job.
They made me feel the same way.
I know I've got two coconuts.
When I'm three, I'm three, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven, I'm seven,
There are different kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints, all kinds of saints
Everything around me is still hot, hot.
If you don't see it, you don't see it, you don't see it, you don't see it, you don't see it.
On the way or on the way, you'll end up with the whole thing, the whole thing, the whole thing, the whole thing.
Now you know how to do the same thing.
Even now, they know that there are so many of them.
It's either one or two.
They're not going to be able to keep up with what's going on.
I don't know how many people live in the city.
I don't even know what they are.
I don't know.
Then the animal itself is going to die.
There are quite a few things to do.
It's underneath the bowl.
Not under the balls, not behind the balls.
Pou jil yo gen yon of the color red fonse, so make jil yo look like.
In fact, they're also white.
I'm not sure how I'm going to make it to the next level.
We are opposed to being the same.
Me, they are the same.
Or do you have the same problem with the two of you?
It's been a long time coming.
yon jan pres
Li like you like you like you like me like you like me.
You're wearing a face like an an
Se pi fasif or find li.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it in time or I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it in time.
I like to kill too much or shoot too much.
The colour is gray on your face.
The men were very clever.
It's easy to walk to the beach.
Or you could say it's a joke.
Men are a beautiful beast li genbyann limen
They know what they're doing.
One of them killed him.
They know how to kill men.
It's a new race for you.
It's easy to get caught up quickly.
You don't have to worry about it.
to do or to direct.
I'm very happy with it.
I'm just trying to get to the bottom of it.
Now I'm going to have a new garden.
They even have something to end up with.
A few words from Mat Blan.
I know the temple for which I'm going to go.
They are the same person.
It looks like the same tops.
They've grown so much that they've gotten to the point where they've gotten to the point where they've got to get to the point where they've got to get to the point where they've got to get to the point where they've got to get to the point where they've got to get to the point where they've got to get to the point where they've got to get to the point where they've got to get to the point where they've got to get to the point where they've got to get to the point where they
I know my manche.
My children have been given the opportunity to live with their parents.
Condan manjou has been convicted of murder.
And now I'm grenn with my kids too.
For all this reason, is there no other way to get rid of it?
It's all about the train.
Yo gen touten l'étranger and yon twen
They are saddened by the fact that they are in a state of shock and saddened by the fact that they are in a state of shock.
There is also a savannah.
One of the savann tou
The train is coming from abroad.
It's all about the quality of everything.
They've been named after him.
I'm going to try to do it myself.
If they are the same race, then they are almost the same race.
On mann sa a m ap dou lala.
If you look at them, they look very similar.
Men, they are even pigs.
It's a short walk from all the trains.
I'm going to have to go back to the drawing board.
I'm going to have to go through your underwear.
Female yo even gen yon color grey an odò yo
I'm going to shoot you with a knife.
They're eating under the covers.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
I've got a lot of people who want to do this.
with the female.
The colour is so fashionable.
I'm going to sing.
chantan jan gra
It's time to move on.
Pedi Pedi, salt kalitya gen, tout perdu Pedi, si gen, si gen men kalitye la city.
Well, here's another one, not a big one.
When you're young, you're ready to launch.
Men are heavily influenced by man.
They'll be there for you.
There's a lot of color in it.
There is almost no bren tout.
They don't drink.
I'm not going to lie to you.
The cell walls are li
I'm not sure if it's white or black, but I'm sure it's black.
It's not like I'm going to be a man.
How are you?
Men, kay, re, re, or will you kill them?
You know how to kill people, even if you're a big animal.
There are scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals, scandals,
I don't know how to talk to men.
Gen on the same portion.
I'm not sure if it's a good idea.
Preske nou gade nisa men kal
That's the difference.
Once they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come, they come
It's time to move on.
Now I can't wait to get back to where I am, and now I can't wait to get back to where I am.
I can't wait to hear it.
They were drunk.
That's why I'm here today.
It's not like I'm going to be able to fly underneath it.
For example, li up a cell or can be taken under the root plum yo
The men are the same.
It's just a matter of time before it's gone.
It's just a matter of time before you and I get back together.
Gen yon mennon m when i want to fly.
There is a long way to go from a plane to a cell to a plane.
I can't wait to hear about this app.
As if I could use the net, I could use the net.
Don't be fooled by men's manners.
When men and women are together, they are all men and women, men and women.
How do I know what to do?
I don't know what I'm going to do now.
They have the same shape as the finest men in the world, but they're smaller and smaller.
If you don't know what you're talking about, there's a lot going on.
If you're going to make a mistake, you're going to have to clean it up.
From the back I reached underneath the bow.
There is no such thing as a genius.
It's the only way to get rid of them.
I've never heard of anyone like this before.
I'm going to call another one.
You'll be able to run the other one.
I'll give you an answer.
La mwen an, la mwen an pa wè.
An, or do you know?
I've got a lot of people here.
When I call you, I know Sheba.
Li chanpe pase
It's the only thing I've ever done before.
I don't know how to do that.
If you don't like them, don't freeze them.
I'm going to tell you what to do.
Bren pal too has a large number of children from one generation to the next.
It's not like they're doing the same thing.
Men, li pigwo, fish, what kind of fish do you know?
It's the only thing I can do for you.
It's all about you.
Are you ready to sell it?
No, I don't want to be here, but I want to be here.
Jan yon msen is still the same family as Zayibet sa yo
They can be polluted.
by exjant lounletes
The same as buying the towel.
It's like a code.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
It's hard to say.
I've never even been in the water.
They're all white.
There are two kinds of water.
From the water, I can make a difference in the water.
How do you know what's going on?
What are the different types of men?
Even in the early stages, we're still here.
I can't wait to get to the same place.
There are a few that are full of white underneath their cells and your mouth.
They are easy to recognize.
Because the animals are in front of themselves too wouj
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
I'm going to wear a dress like Bèt li.
One or two.
I don't know where I'm going to end up.
I've always wanted to do this.
In the same generation, there are many different types of cows.
I'm still here to help you.
Even if it is in heaven, it is in heaven.
It's always been this way or that way.
It also looks like it's too late for water.
They are not men.
It's not like we're going to get water for two nights.
I walked along the river.
There's no such thing as a perfect match.
This enables them to easily navigate their paths.
I can't wait to see what you've got in store for me.
What's the big deal?
I don't think there's a shade of red on my face.
It's not easy to recognize them.
It's because they're in the middle of nowhere.
You're going to have to go to hell, you're going to have to go to heaven.
I'm going to do the same thing.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
People know that there is no such thing as a "silent man".
I'm going to do one or two.
Either you're going to lose your hearing, or you're going to lose your hearing, or you're going to lose your hearing.
Toom pou yon avdi sa a la
People who don't know you know you don't know you well.
No, my father, it is not easy to see you, but you can see me.
Men, men, men.
Well, there's an animal, there's an animal, there's a man, there's two white ones.
I'm so happy I'm here now.
I've had enough of that once and for all.
Soudobèf is now Ekansayen lè
I want you to know that you're doing the same thing.
I'm very happy with the way it turned out for me.
Or I'm going to the cell.
If you can hear me through ecstasy, how can you stop it?
No one is going to be able to stop him.
I'm the only one who can help.
The person is an ansib pale clear a a a
The valley is clear.
There are many other people who don't know what they're talking about.
The people of Okap are open to the public.
I don't want to be here anymore, I want to be here, I want to be here, I want to be here, I want to be here, I want to be here, I want to be here, I want to be here, I want to be here, I want to be here, I want to be here, I want to be here, I want to be here, I want to be here, I want to be here, I want to be here, I want to be here, I want to be here, I want to be here, I want to be here, I want
I don't know if I've ever had an accident.
I have an accidental account.
Or you'll see a drunken party.
I'm going to tell you a story.
The machine that will be used will be Badovrens.
I've been waiting for your good grandfather.
Empi ba direction an kase
I'm going to talk to you.
They want the passengers to leave and what's left to go and invest.
I've been waiting for my mother to come to me.
So that all the Spaniards and their wives could breathe in the driver's breath with their children.
God wants them to be His children.
I'll let you fall on your way there.
They are the same as epi.
They fell into the sea.
Make the same machine.
The peze oren li
Li tout kourak gade lòm epi bade
I have no preachers.
They will appear with the presence of a pony in the labyrinth.
It's not like I'm going to write a code.
There is no such thing as a machine.
There are many ways to do this remodeling.
It's time to send a telegraph to the princely people.
The Anbilans vini epi epi
You bring the wives of men.
Menit la di Onsa with the mother and the father of the pope.
The papal will tell you that I'll be there soon.
I don't know where I'm going or even where I'm going.
I'm going to win a new one.
After taking a car to a party, his wife took a car and drank coffee.
They're back.
with the car in the accident.
Enven to make you wine your ambulances wine take li.
You're a man before anyone.
I'm going to leave you alone.
The wine and the machinery are still there.
They took their children with them.
anbi lanseve epi
I know that I am.
But I'm also a man.
I'm your wife's husband.
You're going to drink wine.
Men, if you want to have a drink, you can have a drink or two.
If all my accidents happen in front of me, I'm going to die.
After all, I've always been passionate about the past.
There are a lot of men out there.
If someone climbs a brazal, even if they fall.
One of them is a horse.
The horse and the horse are still alive.
Then the machine is going in the right direction.
Then you don't have to go through the l...
They can't get enough of it.
Choufye an pa ka reti l
As long as the assets are running at an affordable price.
For the latest moban l
And the wife of the man who is under the throne.
He lost his wife.
If the wife or grenn to my husband, or grenn or grenn, you agree, see.
Will there be two more men or two if a machine reaches a machine?
Even if I don't know where I'm going, I can't.
four in the morning.
Menkote nou vin a rive ya
It's not just water, it's water.
You don't want to hear about the machine.
Run as if from the water.
Who are the people who are responsible for this?
It's not good.
You don't feel like running out of water.
And now I know how to do it.
I'm a better person than anyone else.
Li fin drink Tafya li epi sou
They're going to make the tent and get in the car.
There is no other car than the car.
They've been there for a long time.
They're dead.
Mouri sou richan, a, die sou richan, if all things are equal with chin.
I'm going to die a long time as I touch it, and then I'm going to die.
When a hurricane strikes, it's not like there's nothing else going on.
But hurricanes have passed.
There are a lot of people out there who have a lot of problems.
If it is compatible with doing a great thing Edanp or can be on a randomization including nou karamouri.
It's not a long van.
Se long van kay gandwa shattered your soul wou
Broke and fell.
We're going to see if there's a hurricane.
Some of the people who died in this big vank big vank big lapli
Se cyclone a w
In any case, men tend not to know how to create it.
I don't know how or when a cyclone will be created.
What a hurricane it was.
I'm so tired of having to spend time with Flora.
Then I'll tell you what to do.
They're going to break you down.
There is no one who deserves to die.
To die is to die.
Many lives were lost in the Bouras.
I'll pass it on to them.
They have made great strides in the area of Sila on the other side of the river.
They're coming for me.
Other men will make you a great bride.
And then there's a lot of them.
No, no, no, no, I don't know how I got started.
It's a party.
You already know everything about it.
That's what I'm going to do.
They're going to break my heart.
They're breaking up with you.
I've got a lot of grass on my hands.
I'm not sure who you are.
There are people who will die for the loss of their lives, even if they are still living in the area.
I don't know who you are.
I'm not going to win.
I don't want to lose my membership.
Now, after a decade, I've had enough.
I don't want to be in the field.
or t genfè m
I want to lose the field.
Either you lose it or you lose it.
You're going to lose something.
For one thing, I'm going to answer my question.
I'm on your side.
It's not always the best time to change your mind.
For example, if you're a fan of God, then you're a fan of God.
as if it were a soup.
I'm not sure what happened to the people.
They're going to start off on a painful journey.
I'm going to take a certain amount of time to relax.
It's time to get to the top.
There's a lot of money in the pocket.
There's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
It's not like it's going to happen again.
You're going to do it.
Enven until the distance la m is always with li
One can find new ones by definition.
I know how to cook.
I know I'm going to have to deal with it.
I'm going to have to take a shower.
Resist the will of God.
Oh, well, well, well, well, well, I'm sick of a fever.
From now on, let's go through Men, you're sick with M, if you're sick you're sick.
Manman an di thus I will see how
I'm going to see how you can do that.
Tyabote dolosalon epi
One man came to me.
It's not your fault.
Mwenami zen is a monami.
Ten of these are water.
I'm going to have to pay for it.
And then there's a ton of it.
And when you have a beautiful, loyal family, they are full of them.
And one man is so, men, not so, I'm going to do what I'm going to do now.
They're coming to you.
Li is a descendant of Jakmel.
I can't wait to get started.
It's been a while since we've had a cookie.
They say they're O
They can be seen here.
They can see it and they can see it.
I'm all right now.
I am now a fisherman.
I'm now on my way to tomorrow.
Everything you need to do is take a class in water.
I can sing.
I'm not going to lie to you.
I'm the only one who can do that.
There is no water in the water and nothing is done.
I'm going to drink tea again.
The Lord is my soul.
Lord, my soul is with me.
de zanm landlo
I was silent about it.
I don't want to live on earth.
The decoction and seeds are taken with a coconut and grilled or chilled.
Passing them by the fadesk to the li.
I'll sing you a song and you'll sing me a song and I'll sing you a song and I'll sing you a song and I'll sing you a song and I'll sing you a song and I'll sing you a song and I'll sing you a song and I'll sing you a song and I'll sing you a song and I'll sing you a song and I'll sing you a song and I'll sing you a song and I'll sing you a song and I'll sing you a song and I'll sing you a
I'm ready to sing.
I'm singing and singing for my mother.
I'm going to sing a song for you.
It's a sign of what's to come.
There is no such thing as a Jakond feast.
siyap chante lap kriye epi
Sing a nap lap cold lap kriye.
I'm going to tell you a story.
Li pa sekisye an kalot pero Lidyak tou nou know laj akonjik epi li ap song
I'm going to sing.
I'm going to start singing.
I've been waiting for the last minute for a long time and I've been waiting for a long time.
Take a look at them.
I'm ready to go to the mountains, I'm not a civilian.
I'm sure you'll be able to keep up with these guys.
Lord a renm, or la jenm te zanat li la.
You can also download the blog Bouki and Malis.
I'm asking people who know other people's needs.
They don't have the right to vote.
Ap tandan or mèt ale m
I'm very happy with it.
I'm not going to ask Bouki.
They want to be able to say what they want.
Whether or not you're going to do it, you're not going to do it.
It's just that I'm here and I'm here.
Sing to me now that you're here.
The book men m ap cost l
This book is a book that will cost you a lot of money.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it this way.
Two men are now mothers.
I've been waiting for a man to marry me now.
They know it.
This book is about men and women.
It's not just men, it's men, it's men.
It's a new way of looking at things now.
Epi t anyat now
This is the end of the road.
There is no end in sight.
I know that you've got a lot to do with it.
He knew how to use it.
I'm going to ask you again.
They asked me what I could do.
I've been close to you lately.
And they said Amen.
It's a good idea if you don't know what to do.
I don't see the end of it if I don't say it.
I'm going to come.
It's nice not to say.
I don't think I'm going to be able to make it to the next level.
I'm not sure if I'm good enough.
I told them I was going to go to the bathroom.
If you're going to make it, you're going to make it.
It's a great way to get your hands on it.
I'm going to take my mother's clothes off.
I'm not sure I'm going to be able to do it.
I've been waiting for you.
You're the only one who knows.
Ali took bouki al plon vego li.
I can't speak for two miles.
Mama takou has seen the epi
Li concond le Pase touyem equini loman an an l pass code la epi l fall
and make the same conveyance repeatedly in a member's country.
I'm going to make a phone call and I'm going to kill you.
You're going to have to come up with a plan.
I'm going to make a phone call all over the place.
I'm going to do it all over again.
Li as lost.
Do you want to listen to me?
They'll tell you what to do.
They're going to have to come up with a new word for it.
It's a very special moment.
They don't even know what's going on behind the scenes.
They'll be there for you.
There are two types of measurements.
I'll tell you what I'm going to say.
They're not going to be able to do it.
Tandè as a two-piece band.
I'm going to tell you my story.
I'm going to kill them.
God knows what I'm going to do with all my life.
They will listen to you and they will listen to you.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
They're not going to be able to do it.
It's a big bag.
I'm very happy with the way things are going.
fwon chen men have a bouch li
Or maybe you're just trying to get to Pyebwa.
The metatarsal is the metatarsal is the metatarsal is the metatarsal is the metatarsal is the metatarsal is the metatarsal is the metatarsal is the metatarsal is the metatarsal is the metatarsal is the metatarsal is the metatarsal is the metatarsal is the metatarsal is the metatarsal is the metatarsal is the metatarsal.
Men can be metaphysical.
There is no shortage of food for Sanclantan.
They won't be able to afford to pay their debts.
The metatarsal system of the Sanclantan
It's a party.
It's such a beautiful pill to take.
I sing with the palm of my hand.
I'm going to pitch a pitch.
You're in high school.
It's up to the people who love you.
There is no such thing as a laganm.
If m metatè fa lage de même
They're going to leave, but they're going to die.
They're going to tell you that you're going to die.
The son of Ziep is Ziep wa Gen m..
I'm not sure how much I'm going to pay for it, but I'm sure I'm going to pay for it.
They've got their hands full and they've got their hands full and they've got their hands full and they've got their hands full and they've got their hands full and they've got their hands full and they've got their hands full and they've got their hands full and they've got their hands full and they've got their hands full and they've got their hands full and they've got their hands full and they've got their hands full and they've got their hands full and they've got their hands full and they've got their hands
I'm looking forward to sleeping with you.
You'll be happy to see me win.
More money is in the bank and more is in the bank.
They chased after him and he ran away.
I have suffered greatly, but I have been cut off from the world.
Ap cut the film
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I've been waiting for you.
There is no such thing as a tranblad.
One of the people who have been demon-translated is good and awakened to kill.
It's hard to believe you've come to such a conclusion.
I'm going to make a plap in the mountains.
It's been a long time coming.
There is no such thing as a free lunch, and there is no such thing as a free lunch.
It's the first time anyone has ever taken it.
Li diriz ak mesyon
The configuration is two-to-one.
They're not going to be able to do anything or say anything.
I've lost a lot of weight.
Ak distans and kalbwa tou
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it.
Even though I've lost my voice, I don't want to talk about it anymore.
I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results.
I'm not going to lie.
I'm a man of the people.
I've been waiting for you.
I'm not sure I'm going to be able to do it.
There are many ways to do this.
It's all about men.
Several times a year.
Mass is celebrated in the same way as the Mass.
The cost of Jan Anis Lot
I'm going to see you again.
The same is true of Jen.
Jen bati is the same.
I'm not going to lie.
ben kout blabou
I'm going to ban it.
I can't help but wonder.
La pout nonji bag or live le
If there is a problem, then there is a problem.
Men and men, men and men.
You can drink wine.
It's the only thing I can do.
The mother of wine.
They've got a lot to do with it.
It's not easy for people to have a lot of fun.
There are two types of people who are more likely to be affected than a person.
They fell and sang.
I'm in the mood for something.
I've seen them all around.
Jennou has been banned from the job market.
I'm looking forward to playing with Kayklèt.
I'm going down to the bottom of the stairs.
I'm still singing in front of you.
It's a loaded tree.
Ansi l ap chite
If you're tired of it, you're tired of it.
I've seen her as a mother.
lete la kanbou or in front of m
Conbouk is the new one in Falèv
Li zanit Malis's ap manjan tvèè l
They're the Mayans.
I'm going to watch TV now.
I'm going to tell you a story.
I've got a lot of things going on here.
It's a new way of life.
I'm going to drink wine with you.
There's a lot of courage.
They've got their own wine.
Li te antanmi Chandis te dwo kay malis
They are dark brown.
anpils maliti and bouki
Anpistou li tanmen ropomi lakayman is also known as lakaman
I'm going to go to school.
Anpistou li tenmen bouki domin
This is the first time that I've been able to do this.
They're already in debt.
For the sake of clarity, the bombs are already gone.
I'm going to live in Malish in such a way that I'm sure I'll be there before I go to Malish fwon koutanm ou
Reckon reckon gen
It's all in a nutshell.
Anxious to all adherence.
You can make Tanbou a
They're going to have to hold on to it.
But then again, I'm going to repeat it again and again, it's full of clips.
Li sou bay bouki
This book is a collection of short stories.
They've all been there before.
All the men were rasanm li
All of this is done in a timely manner.
Go to the same place.
I can't wait to get to know you.
I can't wait to get to know you.
I can't help but wonder.
I can't wait to get to Kenbe.
I can't wait to see Petad.
If I could do anything I could fly.
I can't do a good fight again.
I'm not going to lie to you guys.
I'm going to put it together for you to assemble.
You'll never get to drink wine again.
Everything is better than what people do.
He's got two legs.
I'm going to go with a manle fenou, anne ban mwen nou.
In the meantime, I'm going to make a list.
Malis seze lala
You're going to have to keep going, and you're going to have to keep going.
M ap mismane
A bottle of water is enough for bouki.
bouki di Oh
It's just a matter of time before it's too late.
They say they need to be washed out of the water.
I have a full bottle of water.
I have a full bottle of laundry and laundry.
I'm going to tell you a secret, even if it's not true.
I've had an anxiety disorder since I was a kid.
The result is the same as the result.
They can't take it anymore.
I came back to them when I met Lakari.
Pass it on to Madan Bouki
They are called Bouki.
Malis jou so pou fouy 2 is a man's life.
There are two types of people.
They've got a lot to do with it.
Maltese Malis even bouki the same short the same
I know I'm not a big fan of the two of them.
I can't wait to see what everyone else is up to.
I'm going to take care of my kids.
but bouki van kind yo
Yo bay bouki kòb la
And then Mouke came back and bought me a guitar.
I bought a towel for Malis yon toul
I'm not sure about Mouke.
Mouke lakoum is a guitarist from Mouke lako.
I'm going to have a full-fledged post here.
I'm so full of myself and I'm so full of myself and I'm so full of myself and I'm so full of myself and I'm so full of myself and I'm so full of myself and I'm so full of myself and I'm so full of myself and I'm so full of myself and I'm so full of myself and I'm so full of myself and I'm so full of myself and I'm so full of myself.
I've given up on it.
They say they believe in me.
Gen gen gen gen
or langen gen
It's been a long time coming.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm going to give you a pass over here.
I'm going to give you a cold shoulder to cry on.
Or the gen gen gen den gen den lajonèv so full poch mwen
I'm from Mali, but I'm not from Mali.
I don't know if I believe it or not, but I think it's a good idea.
Or so to pass.
or gen gen gen gen den gen den.
The man can go home or die.
It's your home.
En bouki mande wife, cut of the man you are, said Ou crêdes Malis.
I'm going to send you a message from someone who's going to be there for you.
They killed my wife or killed my husband.
In addition to this, I'm going to complete the process.
Lev almost came to an end.
It's good to have a hybrid.
They killed the Kabrid La.
They are perfect.
Li pa yon jenn malis
You've got a lot to do with it.
chak al kamalis li pa yon jenn malis
There are a number of languages spoken by the Madanmalis.
I'm with you.
It is said that the Maldives contains a large number of television stations and television stations.
I'm going to tell you a story.
I don't know if there's anything I can do about it.
There is no wine in it.
We're not going to launch it with the help of men.
I'm going to tell you.
I'm not going to be able to find any men.
I'm going to use a new bay.
Or now it's all dead.
There is a new wave of Mayis.
It's all over now.
Each man has his own account of his life, and he has his own account of his own life.
They're still very much alive.
They're not completely tired of it.
li contimous soul and beef la
There are two beef cattle in the net.
Li kòche bèf la
Li bay malich head to the thank you
It's too late for the re-generation.
Malis discussed with L.
They're not cutting Mayis a
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
Malis took the head of the beef.
It's hard to believe that I've seen it all before.
There's only one generation left in Chemen.
I planted them in the middle of the year.
It's the only way to live.
They were able to say Bonjour Jeter.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to replicate it.
I'm not going to tell you what to do with the beef.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to replicate it.
Nout may sa w wini two
What to do with your teeth?
They're good for tea.
I know what I'm doing.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do that.
I'm going to eat them.
Nouk Malison has two wines.
Or on the surface of a genie's tea.
They're from Bond's grandmother Mayis.
They won't get away with it.
I'll be back in the car again so I can pass.
Ansi lagon car ap fè fè a
I'm going to throw it in the trash.
Li lè nouk Malison has two wines
or a patch of tea.
If you win, I'll give you an answer.
They don't want to listen to the conversation.
It's a good thing I don't want to go back to the old days.
They are located near the flat surface of the earth.
I didn't get an answer.
There are two of them.
There is no income to be gained.
I'm not allowed to pass.
It's a good thing I'm not here right now so I'm not going to answer Nounk Malison's phone.
Come on over and have a cup of tea if you don't want to do it.
It's about a mile away.
There is no mileage limit.
Come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to keep up with the hype.
If Malis is the same system as the app.
I ran away from home.
There will be six books available for purchase.
bouki rebe tout bagai afour a.
The wife of the man's wife.
I've never known where I'd come from.
They're coming together.
They took the wife of their father.
Balnon's wife is pregnant.
The wife of the man is a messiah.
Take your wife to the bathroom.
His wife is not a messiah.
They're on the way to where I'm going with the good people.
I'm telling you that I'm going to blow your fan out of thin air, and I'm going to stick with it.
And that's what it's all about.
I'm going to release my dad to the flamboyance.
I'm going to ask you a question.
It's not like I'm going to blow up the flames.
I've got a ton of them now, but they're new.
They live in their mother's house.
I don't know my dad.
They are my son-in-law and they are my son-in-law.
They told me about their grandmother.
They're talking about their mother.
My wife is my wife now.
I'm finished now.
Madam toukou nan bouch wè
My wife is crying.
They're my wife, and they're my wife.
His wife was more likely to be on the phone.
They gave their wives wine and banished their husbands.
My wife doesn't know why I killed her father-in-law.
Li kasman ap fi vi
I've never been to the same place again.
It's not like I'm going to let you down.
I'm going to give you a taste of the flame.
I don't know if I'm going to make it.
It's a bit of a shock to the system.
My dad told me he was going to have a lot of fun.
I don't know about you.
There is no such thing as "lanmwon".
I'm going to try and get this one right.
I can't wait to get there.
They're my mother.
The wife of the bad flour soul is in love with you and they are in love with you.
They're the only ones who know how to get along with their wives.
They're sitting in your chair.
Hi, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, Peter!
And if you're looking for a lot of moms, a lot of moms, a lot of moms, a lot of moms, a lot of moms, a lot of moms, a lot of moms, a lot of moms, a lot of moms, a lot of moms, a lot of moms, a lot of moms, a lot of moms, a lot of moms, a lot of moms, a lot of moms, a lot of moms, a lot of moms, a lot of moms, a lot of moms
Or am I supposed to be the only one in my family?
Men or women are not allowed to have sex with men.
I'm going to say gen.
The banje on the exapte man an 20 m amit la ou gen, right?
I want you to feel as if you're on your own.
Li pa exapte man sa ou gen value of a
What do you think, how do you do that?
If they don't, people won't pay or, even if they do, they won't come back.
together with your tablam wa an an an
This is the first time I've heard of it.
I'm going to tell you something.
Do you have a great deal more than you do or do you have a great deal more than you do?
You two are great, but to know that you are not alone, as you are left alone, joy?
Ap di, what's the big deal?
When you're ready to do something, how about you two?
Or can I tell you?
So much less fiction now, or what?
We're just too much like the dolphin.
I'm not sure if they're new or new.
Or you can do an Esanmi fi sa a
It's a great carbon fountain.
Or you can put your luggage in front of the door.
Ab defi sa yo too nice a pot of carbon sa.
If you're going to do it, you're going to do it again and again.
It's on the ballot.
I'm going to have to pay the bills for the next twelve.
I'm going to do it all over again.
If you're going to be successful, you're going to be successful.
koto or fè or kodravèl
Do you want to interact with me?
Those who are ahead of them will be ahead of them.
They're right in front of us.
In front of him or behind him or behind him.
I don't know how to speak Creole.
It's not like we're going to be able to do the same thing.
It's not about you, it's about you.
Or you can say or do something in Creole.
Or you could say it's the same thing.
I don't know who I've been with since.
Get up and do your job.
You're going to be the only one left.
They've never been there before.
He told his rival at the time.
They're going to love me.
They wanted me to be a san bagen.
So I have too much time to fly to Esab, as I have to fly to people.
They don't want it to be easy.
Do you know what time it is?
Or on time or on time.
I'm going to do everything right now.
such as w ap tipay or now
I'm going back to my grandmother now.
Men are now men
They can all be together now.
Ba ou la pa a, or kapab chak jou a or bon now toukè or konn ap now, an pou an gonfle.
or wine or something like that.
Today is the day to make a big decision.
Good or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad, or bad
Took or didn't take a lot of time to get out of bed.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm going to be a little late in the day.
Or do you know?
or welcome to know
Welcome to my home.
If I can't find out again, why don't I ask you to find out?
What will I do when I'm done with it?
I asked him if he could file for bankruptcy, but did he know?
What is the meaning of this verse, and what is the meaning of this verse?
I'll tell you what, I'll tell you what?
There is no doubt about it.
I'm also a congratulatory person.
The pitlap put all the luggage at an tou nou kouche
How can you or can you do it?
I'd like to touch you up there now.
You can buy the wine.
I'm also very happy with it.
or menmen menmen men
I can't wait to see it.
You've got a lot to say.
I'm not sure what to do with it.
It's not about men.
In order to break through, I'm going to tell you a story, and I'm going to tell you a story, and I'm going to tell you a story, and I'm going to tell you a story, and I'm going to tell you a story, and I'm going to tell you a story, and I'm going to tell you a story, and I'm going to tell you a story, and I'm going to tell you a story, and I'm going to tell you a story.
I'm going to interact with people who don't have any respect for people.
There is no such thing as a person.
Those who know how to use telephones to communicate with people who respect them, know how to communicate with them.
Now you're like a human being.
It can be used in a variety of ways.
Ever since I've been on the air, I've been on the air.
I can't wait to get back on track.
The grangou rete do now or vinman yo
You're also a very good fan.
To be or not to be.
In the meantime, I'm going to be able to do a lot more than I can do.
Pa m fache yè yon ti prizantriy ap savèl li fache
A te m fache
I'm sure you'll find a way.
I don't know how to do this.
You know what I mean.
Vakannumèd gen anka?
Aki, who's the winner?
What is the meaning of life, what is the meaning of life, what is the meaning of life, what is the meaning of life, what is the meaning of life, what is the meaning of life, what is the meaning of life, what is the meaning of life, what is the meaning of life, what is the meaning of life, and what is the meaning of life?
WI, do you know what they are?
No one is going to be able to stop me.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it.
After a while, you'll be able to catch up.
When I was a kid, I was a teenager.
I'm not a dentist, I'm a dentist, I'm not a dentist, I'm not a dentist, I'm a dentist, I'm a dentist, I'm a dentist, I'm a dentist, I'm a dentist, I'm a dentist, I'm a dentist, I'm a dentist, I'm a dentist, I'm a dentist, and I'm a dentist.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it again.
It's your network or your epiphany.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything like this.
I'm in the middle of falling.
It's either timou or dou.
If they fall on me, they know that God's grace will bring them down.
We can't afford to lose a ton of weight, can we?
Or if he knew God's plan, he would have fallen to his knees.
How do you know the good news?
If you say w ap manjan
Or fin ban me now
You're going to ban me.
I'm going to tell you the truth.
What's going on here?
If I say men, I don't mean to say, many in the world.
I'm going to interact with you, and you're going to be able to get up to speed so fast!
What do you say to a cow or a rabbit?
OK, so you don't have to worry about it, OK, see you.
I've been wanting to go back to the drawing board.
How can I tell you that I'm not going to be able to take care of you?
Such as when you're in the middle of something else.
Or do you know how to treat a sick person?
I can't wait to see what you're up to.
It can be used twice a day.
pi w w and ap visan.
The rest of the world is full of people who can't afford to lose weight.
There is no other way to do this.
Or are there other ways of doing it?
And, well, the people who have the evidence of one's own kind of travance, I can't win.
For more or less, or more or less, or more or less.
I'm going to tell you the truth, I'm going to tell you the truth, I'm going to tell you the truth, I'm going to tell you the truth, I'm going to tell you the truth, I'm going to tell you the truth, I'm going to tell you the truth, I'm going to tell you the truth, I'm going to tell you the truth, I'm going to tell you the truth, I'm going to tell you the truth, I'm going to tell you the truth.
I'm going to tell you.
If you're going to send someone, you're going to send someone.
I'm going to send you a 3 tablespoon.
I'm going to tell you two things.
Do you want me to tap the bill?
Did I tap a bill?
Do I tap a bill, if I drink wine, or do I know what to eat or what not to eat?
Likewise, the only place to stay is at home or a long way from home.
I can't wait to get back to my house.
Just like I've seen before.
I can't help but wonder.
I'm not sure if this is true or not.
I've been waiting for you to come home.
It's not like I'm falling in love with you.
jenn gade tou
The story is told from the point of view of a woman.
I'm not going to lie.
It's just a little too much.
We also directed the mandan to a Wouy
People can take advantage of them, such as gwen ba la bòl l' pran tansye sa w as
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything like that.
It's either the final or it's a fast-paced game.
It's not like I was born yesterday.
I'm not a man.
Who wouldn't want to see him?
I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it to the funeral.
There are a lot of people out there who are passionate about what they do.
For a long time, people have been reluctant to listen to me.
It's important to know that no one ever kills another person.
That's why I'm here.
It's been a long time since I've been on the other side of the world.
There is no doubt that the ancient people of Abraham did not know what to do with themselves.
This is the story of Abraham.
People want to take things for granted.
Don't do or don't do anything ahead of time.
Don't worry about it or I'll tell you.
Or you don't need to pay.
Don't show me the problem.
or a reward.
It's not a barrier.
Kitchen or can be benisa.
Many people have become acquainted with your brother.
My father's son is a cousin to my brother.
My father's son is a younger brother.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to do it anytime soon.
Moreover, it is not possible to get rid of them.
The moutre t konmab
Or it can be discounted.
You can't take a drink or even a bath.
Even with the tap drain, I can't tell you what to do or what not to do.
Or maybe it's your thing to replace it with.
I'm not going to say anything.
O moutre is the one who is affected.
It's been so long since I've been there.
You've got them too.
I'm also a big fan of converting wine to white.
I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit
I'd like to know where I'm going with my life.
I can't wait to see what happens next.
I can't wait to see what you want.
I don't want to go back to school.
It's either new or new.
I'm on my way home.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm in the mood for something.
I can't stop myself.
Or to ask or to ask for someone else's help.
I can't wait to get through it.
Or I'll do it together.
You're the only one who can do it.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
Loukay la jis
There is no doubt about it.
Aloukay la jis
Li ka fou re chemis sa a sonmò konsan ti
I have met chemis la sou in your house.
I met chemis lat lat zan
They will be able to answer their questions.
Aloukay li te chemis la lanvè
If you want to make a decision, you have to make a decision.
On the same footing with pi granp or o o
It's me, too.
My wife is a great-grandmother.
My wife has been a great-grandmother for a long time.
It's not enough to be sick.
You can't do that to people.
or prophesy or say a
Pip menme or pi jan or ye bayizan
I'm going to tell you what to do and I'm going to tell you what to do and I'm going to tell you what to do.
How do you feel about it?
Or you're too bad.
You've got to be good at it.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
You're the only one who knows.
It's not about who you are or who you are.
It's either you or me.
Or you're going to have to do something about it.
or to your mouth.
Or you're just sitting there for a minute or so, or you're just standing there talking to me.
They've been there for a long time.
After a few minutes, you'll be there.
So, in other words, do you read it?
And, remember, they are empty, their lips are empty.
What do you think of me?
Esip aizanp or di person big big lareplik all people have a long way to go
Anjan as si o pap dwe dou gen great a
As if we knew something from the beginning of January.
As if they knew who they were at the concert.
I can't tell anyone or anything or I want to show anyone who knows everything.
It's the only thing I've ever known that everyone is hungry.
Or will they know or will they order a lot?
Or will they ever order too much?
I'm going to take people from all walks of life, from all walks of life.
Or like I'm going to work in a paper kit.
I want to work with you all.
It's not like I'm doing anything wrong.
I'm going to tell you about a gravy.
or rede mode or rede
Or even to work as a clerk.
Do you know what I'm doing?
I don't know if I can do it or not.
Man, how can I do this job?
Can you tell me what to do, or can you tell me what to do?
Well, it's a taboo of mine to play with.
I don't know how to make it work, man.
I can't give you anything.
Calte t pou phone bay they can be now
Li rey now pi nan men wili or bay wili now too
It's all over the place.
I'm looking forward to it now.
miray pa now miray pa now
I can't wait to get back to you.
Or two generations.
Or you know what you're looking at right now.
You either know it or you know it now.
Eat or drink or drink now or later.
Or you're going to enter.
I'm going to go for a walk or a walk or a picnic.
Take it or leave it now.
It's the first time I've seen it.
Or are they in the public domain now?
Or you can do it or you can model it.
now or later.
What kind of soup is it?
So, if you want to know what's going on, you've got to know what's going on.
I'm going to take care of my baby.
I don't know anyone who can hear Calvary.
No one knows the salt of the earth.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do that.
The key is to revanch.
It's hard to hear.
I can't or won't know anything else.
It's not just a matter of time.
The person or persons of a piotee such as wap pale mwen the person or persons of a zanm
Men or be able no man as if they know what they can do.
Men like you in the end won't take no for an answer.
Or ban me now.
Or you can give me a new man to understand.
I'm trying to understand how I feel.
Li pa fin gen san karo
Ap di l gen
Li vase gen san ka yo te Si vay egizanm
I don't want to be here anymore.
I asked him if he was still alive.
They are wise and knowledgeable.
This is not to say that you are not a man, or that you are not a man, or that you are not a man.
or know men.
An lamè or konn men
There's another place.
I'm not going to lie, but I'm going to lie.
I don't know what to do, but it's water.
They will be in front of the other pole again.
It's the only way I'm going to get it done.
I'm going to tell you how to make a man.
At the end of the day, we're going to get to the bottom of it.
Among the sources of information is the translation of the text.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
It's a race to the top.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
It's the only way I'm going to make it.
I've been drinking wine for a while.
We're all just going to have to make up our minds about wine.
I am the grandfather of the people of Bali.
For the people of this country.
Men, people don't want money or money or money, so they don't want money.
I'm wondering how I'm going to do it.
How am I supposed to do this?
This is the kind of thing that happens to other sons and daughters.
You can read yourself.
epi or di epi
You've got your kids.
I'm just going to pass.
Men like to understand the basics of reading.
Gen understands the base of the web.
Don't get me wrong, I don't want to get me wrong again.
The men's side of the race is up.
Men or other men may take biscuits or muffins, or they may be taken by hand.
So, where can I get more money and win?
It's like a big bay.
Li pi vi ti and wouk o a
or pa t la
Or the two of them.
I'm so grateful to you for your help.
Fin pwonti mache make m ap jenn kay la epi epi
Konmi is a member of M.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
I'm going to tell you a story.
I feel like I'm going to end up with a feeling like I'm going to move or something like that.
Jodi and I are both originally from or familiar with the model people.
It's the only thing that comes out of it, and it's the only thing that makes a new person so powerful in the world.
or with a wall.
There are other people like this who are passing by.
There are two new people.
Others are going to have to do it all over again.
I'm one of those people who passes the world.
You are the one who has to pass through.
Do you have a job for me or do you have a job for me?
Two such people were killed, one by the animal, and the other by the dead animal.
I know who I'm going to die, I'm going to die again.
Maybe everyone's a kid, or I'm going to have to do something about it.
pi, or one of the children, you know, se radis.
It's not just me, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you.
I'm going to buy it.
If you buy the man, you can always buy the man from me.
I've always wanted to buy one.
Tell them not to like me, so I'll buy two episodes.
epa buy w ap buy session
I'm going to take Atkan six times a day.
Kenba k ap di mainly lay la a to?
The same person as you.
It is a reminder of the wine of Lord Raman.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to do that.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
There is no wine here.
They know the wine from here.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
They don't drink wine from here.
What's going on?
Where are you coming from?
How much longer?
Are you with me?
What do you think of me?
A gen lòt jan w kan an as chan koum
It's important to know what you're going to do with your luggage.
And when Nidan wants to move, or when he wants to move, he wants to know how Wap is doing.
Esizye w t al nan machan or nou nou nou l ap or chte nou nou nou l o l o l o l o l o l o l o l o l o l o l o l o r e in the purchase of a
Two other people have been killed in a car accident or two others have been killed in a car accident.
or other people's lives.
Or two people like me.
I'm going to tell you a story.
I'm a man of the people.
The people who bought it.
I want to or I don't want to.
One of them is in the genus Chte yon.
They don't need it.
If you don't want to go, because if you don't want to go, you can go.
We know that there is no such thing as Tanton.
This is why we are here to help you.
My aunt and uncle were there.
You've got to take care of yourself.
They don't know what they want.
It's like you're watching everyone else's party.
All of these people are now eleven years old.
Let's get together and talk about it.
I know I'm coming from behind.
I'm with you, too.
As if a close friend of someone and a thief were to steal it from you, you would have to live with it.
Yo vin arete stole a a a
Anpwap li mezanmi and ap rete vole a
As if and only on other people.
It's either good or bad.
And then there's the robbery.
Men are also involved.
It's a networking site for you.
Gen such on ti moun men
There is no such thing as a gene.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to do it again.
On the other hand, I'm not sure.
I've been banned for a long time.
or of a male as a.
It's the only thing I want to do that makes me feel better.
Men or women and men are always in demand.
We will always be grateful to you.
Even men are not allowed to do so.
Like the people making coffee for someone else.
This person or two is a patient of the epileptic seizure.
My father predicted it.
I'm not going to do it.
Is there anyone else who can help you?
That's all there is to it.
If they are very rich or generous, they are very rich.
Tankou w ti people
Or you're going to have sex with him.
Tanzan tan chak sa w brother li
They're taking me back every time like this.
I'm not going back to anon.
I've been there a few times.
I've never seen or heard of a backseat.
It's been a long time since I've been able to do this.
I've heard a lot about it before.
Because every time I go back to you, I'm going back to you.
Or you can play the game backwards.
I'm sure Maryou will continue to do so.
They're going to be there with me.
Where is Malab or well swari we are the men who have to rely on you?
Malab is on the balance sheet again.
You've got to do what you've got to do.
Wherever you are, I'll be there.
That's why I'm here.
The men's team has already won the championship.
They don't want to come here.
I know how to make a living from it, and I know how to make a living from it, and I know how to make a living from it.
A different timon or k ap put it on you and send it to you.
Many of you are here because I am ill.
or k ap di sa
K ap di m
It's like when a lot of people are cut off like a bunch of men.
He is the chief of staff of the KAP KITE I cut off.
Exisye can be in front of the chief and the w ap can be given an an an as t o u
or by others.
It's because he's the boss, or because he doesn't want to be recognized.
If, for example, m is the gateway, then the gateway to the exit is the gateway, because it is the gateway.
You can't do anything about it, or you can't do anything about it, or you can't do anything about it.
I'm going to get out of here and I'm going to get out of here and I'm going to get in there.
or besan w entr
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm going to start from scratch or I'm going to start from scratch.
It's not like I'm drinking wine or anything.
The same vin tout expressse kouto o vin
I'm going to do the same thing.
I can use the barrel or the barrel.
It's not like I'm going to be able to talk to you for a few minutes.
What can I do about it?
Where am I supposed to be?
What's the matter with you?
If I had to do it all over again, what would I do?
Wouldn't you be an angel?
I know.
Can I get a new one?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
If you are a Manlade
There's no such thing as a man who can't really tell me who Manlad really is.
It's the first time I've seen it.
John is the only one I have ever met.
A bus is a man's car, a man's car, a man's car, a man's car, a man's car, a man's car, a man's car, a man's car, a man's car, a man's car, a man's car, a man's car, a man's car, a man's car, a man's car, a man's car, a man's car, a man's car, a man's car, and a man's car.
I don't know what to say.
Either I'm going to die, or I'm going to die.
I'm pleased with the results.
So you won't know me again.
It's not like they're going to be able to pull it off.
There are other conditions and promises that will last a long time.
I don't think I'll ever know again.
It's not like I'm going to ban anything.
I don't know yet.
People like Baizanp are coming.
I'll give you a copy of it and a copy of it.
Epi, I'm OK with that.
I'm going to replace them, I'm going to replace them, I'm going to replace them, I'm going to replace them, I'm going to replace them, I'm going to replace them, I'm going to replace them, I'm going to replace them, I'm going to replace them, I'm going to replace them, I'm going to replace them.
I'm good, and I'll tell the person I'm talking to, look, tell me how or where I'm going to be in my house.
Pi san, pi never saw her again.
If I don't come here today, I'm going to have 12 people.
I'm not going to be able to do it again.
They're not going to be able to keep up with me.
I've been waiting for you to come here.
I can't help but wonder.
It's not a big deal to me.
I've been waiting for you to come to me, and I've been waiting for you to come to me, and I've been waiting for you to come to me.
I don't know who you are.
I'm always on the lookout for men.
Pat Ekzab is the same neton in the head as if he or she were a.
Will I be able to tell you if I'm going to be your friend or not?
They are the guards.
Is there anyone who needs to know the video will be a step ahead of me?
Grandpa, open up the school, or you can ask your question.
When I opened the school, what did I do?
What's the matter with you?
m, apri sa or pa can impose ikesyon an ladjan l, m?
First of all, what can I do to make sure that I don't lose weight?
Well, what's the point of having the same name?
I'm going to get my money's worth.
I'm trying to figure out how to get to the bottom of it.
What do you think?
Ever since I met you, I've been in love with you.
The kitchen can be used as a kitchen sink.
I'm going to be a kite w
I can't wait to get back to the drawing board and see how it goes.
How do you know what's going on?
It's the other way around, but it's also the other way around.
Konsin met rad sou mwen m ap tan nou.
If it comes from the door, it comes from the door.
Good people appear.
Suyi m ta ta dovi epi
I've seen the weight.
How can I help you?
I'm going to the south.
An ap of the output is displayed.
Why did you put rad on your party?
Have you had a party?
There are many ways in which I can get up.
Why should I go up there?
Do you want me to be a soldier and a coach?
I'm just going to lie down and lie down for a while.
It's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right,
Well, man, I'm going to take a look.
Why am I doing this?
I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell
Look where I am.
I'm here for you guys, I'm here for you guys.
I'm going to take a picture of what's going on, what's going on, what's going on?
If I do, the key to the people will be to me.
E, m ap gade w men, men m take a post or wa yon jan m put a head of men, what is w ap da?
Koube, wait for me or wait for the people?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
I'm in the mood for men's shoes.
Will I be able to make myself or both of you clear my mind?
We are looking forward to Patjan.
Or do they know?
Fijankou w ap gade m
I want to show you how to make a bagal at the end of the day.
It's a good time to watch.
I'm going to do other things.
I'm proud to say that I'm proud of you.
We are in Fijankou.
I can do it.
I can't wait to do another one.
Am I going to make an antidote to it?
Two or two or two people or two?
If the two men were to pass by, they would be either paralyzed or killed in the line of duty.
And if it's cooking or passing, where are they?
That's right, I'm going to buy coffee, I'm going to buy coffee, I'm going to buy coffee, I'm going to buy coffee, I'm going to buy coffee, I'm going to buy coffee, I'm going to buy coffee, I'm going to buy coffee, I'm going to buy coffee, I'm going to buy coffee, I'm going to buy coffee, I'm going to buy coffee, I'm going to buy coffee, I'm going to buy coffee, I'm going to buy coffee, I
Abbi m ap kite cafe a story m lanmi?
Or maybe now we're going to have a cup of coffee and a tankou man and that's what happened.
I'm not even very relaxed, but I can go back to Oh
I'm a fan of what you want me to do now.
I'll tell you what I've been up to.
Take your soul.
Like, you're with me, you're with me, you're with me, you're with me, you're with me, you're with me, you're with me, you're with me, you're with me, you're with me, you're with me, you're with me, you're with me, you're with me, you're with me, you're with me, you're with me, you're with me, you're with me, you're with me, you're with
You know about the people of the Moche people.
I don't want to know what's going on.
When you die, you're dead.
Why am I here?
I know I can't die.
Kou la, mawou, te ou drape pa t la eke, people people come out, many people.
I can't wait to get out of here.
It's been a long time coming since my grandmother's birthday.
It comes from ten grandmothers.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I don't know if I'm coming.
I can't wait to see it.
I've been out of town all morning, and I don't know if I'm going to make it.
I've been working on it for a long time, epi.
They don't want to work, or they can't or won't work, or they can't or won't work.
Or on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand, on the other hand,
I've met you in the middle of the night.
Or at least one more time.
I don't know what to do, or what to do.
If I have a child, or I'm going to have a baby, I'm going to have a baby.
I can't wait to see what happens next.
We're not going to go back.
I'm going to double up on you.
Such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such as a man, such
Now we have to take a look at the exhibition.
People who want to go to school do not want to go to school.
They don't even eat them.
You may also be able to extend the length of time you have to take on the journey.
I'm going back to school again.
They're not going to be able to do that anymore.
I told him that the men were at the school.
My dad ate a bunch of them.
If you don't, you won't be able to do the same thing again.
Jesus did not say that he could record an account of himself.
such as the pap Vinizya doop man nan kay la
I've been banned by my dad.
It's better to have someone answer the question than to have someone answer the question.
Answer right or wrong.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
There's only one boat left.
I don't want to talk to him, I don't have to answer.
This is a very good app.
Repeat the wording of the first sentence in the sentence.
Or not at all.
or to make a direct appearance.
or know p ap fache an pou or mawon
I'm not sure what to do with myself.
tabi al kout papam an men monji teljan
I'm going to be a father figure.
m or a
I'm in the mood for something like this.
or a short papam m
According to Ephesus, there is no such thing.
Or at the very least.
or pa al now
Now I know what I'm talking about.
I'm not going to tell you what I'm going to tell you right now.
They won't be able to keep up.
I'm here for you now, I'm here for you now, I'm here for you now.
By tent or just like that
How to rap a rapper or a rapper who's not a rapper.
When you're ready, you're going to have a lot of fun.
Or give or take a good man's advice.
Or wash people's clothes or clean the earth.
I've never seen anything like this before.
It's not about the timon or the kont li.
I wash my clothes cleanly and thoroughly.
I can't help but wonder if someone else can help me.
There is no one to blame.
After retiring from the army.
I'll tell you how I feel about you.
I'm not sure about that.
In Vienna, there is no such thing as a free lunch.
I'm going to tell you why Alan is the only one who can tell you.
Or do we come from where we come from?
Where do you go from here, where do you go from here?
Money, guitars, and bills will come with money, so that they don't get caught up in it.
I'm going to ask you a few questions.
Is it a mother's or a mother's?
This is my mother's best friend.
You've lost your head.
I've heard about the papacy and my mother.
I lost my father and my mother.
I lost my mother.
I've lost your head.
My father and my mother.
They're going to be just like the ones on the other side of the fence.
They say everything as you are.
They have been given the opportunity to make a lot of bags of acupuncture.
They don't have to be on the same page.
They don't eat or drink anything.
I'm not the one who's going to kill you.
It's a good one.
I don't want to hurt anyone or anything but you.
I'm looking forward to the new year.
Or you can tell them that they've met each other.
It's either fixed or it can be fixed.
We all know that we can't afford to lose everything.
In the end I meton chapon nou Non only members ap li pou tannou a epi
If there is one person in the room.
It's about people who work hard to make ends meet.
They're not doing their job.
They are also willing to talk to one another.
Ap li, yoi, a person who works, is rewarded.
Who are you?
Or I'm going to put an airplane in there.
or on account of salvation.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
Or even to do something about it.
Either we're going to get in, or we're not going to get in.
I don't know, but I'm thankful.
What do you want me to do, or how can I do it?
I'm here, I'm here.
Men, if you want to be a man, you want to be a man or a woman.
Ensi ta kouta gen
or gen zon yon gen jou chalòt la
I'm very happy with my life.
I can't put my finger on it.
I don't want to put too much pressure on you.
I'm in the middle of a baggage claim.
One of the young priests, who had been a priest for twelve years, knew that there was something new to be said about him.
I've met a lot of people.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you.
O jechalòt met moun chou di a.
I'm not going to let anyone down at home.
I'm going to steal everything or I'm going to die.
They're stealing from me.
Li joure ou
I want you to know that I stole everything from this chart.
Non salman t steale yo
An outsider can steal everything or leave it alone or leave it alone.
It's either bad or bad.
It's not like I know men who play dominoes.
or achiche domino tou sa or know mwen men
Or your cake.
I'm going to tell you something.
Outside of me epi epi
Or is that what you want me to do?
I can't wait to see it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
I can't wait to hear about what's coming.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
The teeth are very small.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
Let's make some wine.
And if the parking lot is good now, everything is good now.
Either I can, or I won't, or I won't be able to give up.
Ali piske, am I coming now or not now, kitten yo?
From childhood onwards, epi or bon now annda, or enter, or even now.
If you think about it right now, if you're ready to pray, how can you say it?
It's all right, it's all right, it's all right.
Or it may be an important tool for finding out how to use it.
I'm not going to go through a long vival.
I'll be back in 2980 an lavase, and I'll be all right.
OK, well, if you're going to buy it, I'm going to buy it.
Lots of kids come along.
Gen very many yon
Yote included all the children who came to the gen yon
It's as if I'm watching everyone who's watching everyone who's coming.
I don't want to be here.
What do you think of the men?
Moreover, they said that they would not come.
I've been waiting for you to come.
What if there are other ways to do this?
There are only men and women in Tavin If you ban an adult to do the same.
That's what I'm talking about.
I'm going to the men's room.
Did you ever win a world championship?
What would you say to me if I didn't answer?
I would like to know, how do I get to know you?
Depending on the money, the person, the dollar, I do.
And according to the cabrit la?
When I'm with you, I want everything new in your life, right?
OK, I'd like to know, persi bokou.
Don't get me wrong, right, right.
I'm not a man.
You've got a lot to do with your life.
I know how to take a bath.
I know how to take a bath.
I know how much I want to give a child to put on a children's guide for the sea.
This is a children's guide.
I know how to take a bath.
I know what to do in front of you.
I've always wanted to do this, but I've always wanted to do this, and I've always wanted to do this.
Part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part, part
Hey, how are you?
Where did you go to high school?
Who do you know?
I know that you came as, came as, came as, came as, came as, came as, came as, came as.
I will ban you from Eskwach
Now you know I'm going to be an Eskwach.
There are no men who can help you.
What is the meaning of life now?
As if I didn't have time to tell you, I'm not a baby right now, but I'm a Jew, a Jew, a Jew, a Jew, a Jew, a Jew, a Jew.
If I don't know what I'm doing, I can't be your baby.
as, as ann rele tou.
Or will buy it.
I'm going to go with Anitwal and I'm going to be on the trail.
I'm going to walk with you.
Se jejanm, anitwalè, kone l.
You can put it on now
Can you trust them?
You don't trust people, you don't trust people, you don't trust people.
Are you sure you don't like me?
It's not like I don't want to do it again.
But you can't trust the king.
Is there any other way to make soup?
You can use it to make the soup.
or with jou nou li long
They are made of concrete in epis
or mèt makawon li
I was born in a small town.
I'm a big fan of the new one.
I've been banned a lot.
How to make a flashlight gene spopp
I can't wait to see the rest of them.
It's not that bad.
That's right, yeah.
You're not going to get it.
They are white with vegetables.
w eti men and chou
We're going to build a new ship.
I'm going to make you feel sorry for me.
This is why I'm sorry.
Well, you'll have to do something with everything and then you'll have to put Bègraf, Kressonch, or put in a nice plate.
Who's going to eat them?
Anmen, are you ready to go?
Put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on, put on.
Or met manje a, or met te toumat, or met te legi bayanfen bay ay o salèz?
Or will I be salty, or will I be salty too?
The sauce is not a salad you know how to make?
There are a few bays that I've met before.
If you want to make a meal, you can make a soup.
You don't know what to do and what to expect from someone.
If you don't know what you're talking about, you know what you're talking about, you know what you're talking about, you know what you're talking about, you know what you're talking about, you know what you're talking about, you know what you're talking about, you know what you're talking about, you know what you're talking about, you know what you're talking about, you know what you're talking about, you know what you're talking about, you know what you're talking about, you know what you'
Everything is new to your eyes, but you know I'm 15 years old.
I just wanted to let you know that I'm on my knees.
M, yo pa mann yo city, and jan no one creates bands of box or under, they sell cities.
I know how many people are listening to you, and I know how many people are listening to you.
Well, yeah, if you know how to cut it, you don't have to.
You've got what it takes to make a splash here.
I'm going to tell you all about it.
They say they're going to have to run.
They're going to have to go to the bathroom to get some water and then they're going to have to go to the bathroom to get some water.
In the meantime, I'm going to try to find a way to make it work.
He killed himself in order to kill himself.
Li passed by a pi
I've been working on this for ten years and a month now, and I'm working on it.
I'm going to take it and I'm going to cut it and I'm going to cut it.
I'm going to eat, I'm going to eat, I'm going to eat, I'm going to eat, I'm going to eat, I'm going to eat, I'm going to eat, I'm going to eat, I'm going to eat, I'm going to eat, I'm going to eat, I'm going to eat, I'm going to eat, I'm going to eat, I'm going to eat, I'm going to eat, I'm going to eat, I'm going to eat,
They're going to be white.
It's just like now and I'm doing it all over again.
Will it be with you and will it be with you even if it is with you?
Will or will not.
They're going to be white.
They're going to kill you, they're going to kill you, they're going to kill you, they're going to kill you, they're going to kill you, they're going to kill you, they're going to kill you, they're going to kill you, they're going to kill you, they're going to kill you, they're going to kill you, they're going to kill you, they're going to kill you, they're going to kill you, they're going to kill you, they're going to kill
I will repra blan pral pral then nou nou tann
Now you know who you are and what you're going through.
Now we know all sorts of leaves.
Now you're on the other side of the world.
Chou lanman is the one who has done it again.
It's all over now.
They are now in lanman
Now there is a new lanman
I've got another legume in my legume again.
Do you want to buy a new one?
Now I know what I'm doing.
Now you know who you are.
There's nothing new about the old one.
I'm not going to be able to do it.
They're going to kill you.
It is a boujan pral
Now I know what I'm going to do.
They don't drink wine and they don't go through with it.
And I'm going to tell you how I'm going to do it.
They will send you pra
Or I have a good mout.
If you don't sleep, if you don't sleep, you're going to die.
So, what's wrong with what we're doing?
It's all about the book.
I've been doing this for decades.
It's the way of the man.
It's for other men.
I'm going totip now everything we want to do, everything we want to do now.
If you don't know what to do right now, if you don't know what to do next, I'm going to have to ask you.
I also heard a voice.
and pa gounbo
I'm going to be a big fan.
I'm going to try to make a living off of it, and I'm going to try to make a living off of it.
They're not there yet.
I don't know what you're talking about.
I don't know if I'm going to win or not.
One of the militants.
Ap militou and yo pre a year under the E se militon with
One militon is the same.
The militou an nou men
Yes, you can, you can, you can.
If you don't have a coupon, you can't buy it before you buy it.
It's not like I'm a man.
I'm not a new man or woman.
I'll be there for you.
I'll be back in three days.
Or wash, or wash the dishes, or before or after, or after, or after, or after, or after, or after, or after, or after.
He's going to take a fight for a soap with you.
You can't put any salt in it.
Now I'm wearing a hat and I'm covering it.
What is the meaning of a cell?
Men, men, I forbid this.
If you take everything in a pack of new sheets, put it together.
I could use a pack of high-quality leaves to do something about it.
Men, men, when you relegate me, relegate me.
Are you the only one who knows?
I can't eat them now.
Then, relegin, you piss on my face.
Do you want me or am I legin, or am I legin?
I don't know how I'm going to make it.
There's a lot of greatness in it.
That's why I bought the lache.
Men are truly worthy.
Or how much more likely it is.
But I'll be there too.
If I don't do it again, or if I don't do it again, or if I don't do it again, then I'm going to have to do it legally.
Gennwa fwon legil manj, or si o m pa m nan again, or greye l an an an an an, gennwa greye l an l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l
If you don't wear a glove, you don't have to wear a glove.
Enmenye, leve ritab butyi.
There's really no way I'm going to make a phone call.
or pass flour.
Or put it in the grass.
I don't know if it's Greek or Greek.
Or I'm going through a rough patch.
I'm in the middle of my daily routine in the city.
There are several ways to build a city.
Yo woule epi
I made a phone call to you.
You're going to have to wait until you're done.
Yon bon se nou tout yon debay sa ye.
I made them wine for my aunt so I could prache lakouto.
Bo, you know I'm a cop, I'm a cop.
Your companion, my father.
Men, I'm going to make you a fan of Riyan.
That's what I'm doing.
This is a fine vannen.
or vannen li
Or put it in a short time in the press.
So you want it now.
I've met many people in the past.
It's either short-term or long-term.
You don't want to be short or short.
It's also great to be able to see the colour of the paint.
It's not because we can't afford to buy it in color.
men bay w buy  men buy  men buy  men buy  men buy  men buy  men buy  men buy  men buy  men buy  men buy  men buy  men buy  men buy  men buy  men buy  men buy  men buy  men buy  men
It can be colored in a variety of colors.
This is why they're here to help you.
I don't know what to do with myself and I don't know what to do with myself.
What's the point?
Bou, what can you do now, since you've put so much effort into getting you caught?
Everything is bad now
You've got to release it.
The two men left.
I'm going to do it now.
Or put on a bracelet.
An eye knows how to make soup.
I used to make soup with joumou.
I'm going to tell you what to do next.
Or see too plajounm or
or set up a new account.
Or put on a bowl of chopsticks.
or mete dirou
Or put on some cocoa butter.
Or a banana, or a potato, or a yeast, or a herb in it.
Wye, now mixed with bouyon, e men two, now mixed since I've been bouyon including, if even bay.
Ben yon bay or know how to do with a sauce or put on a sauce if you don't know how to make a good bouyon wavelength.
Prason sauce, or do you make Prason sauce?
Or loul do lib
or after or at the end of the prason trap.
After or at the end of a prason trap or a pole.
I can't be bothered.
The men who put it on or the men who grew up with it.
I don't know what to do about it, but I know what to do about it.
Fi fiyaw or two men a
Or you're going to be the mother of men.
I'm going to serve the city.
There are more than a dozen cities in the region.
That's the way it is.
Men don't use all the fil yo
The men served in the city.
I'm not a man.
I'm with Abel and I'm with you.
But I've been able to do that for a long time.
There are millions of people who live with it.
There are thousands of people living in Serbian cities and towns.
Men are like you and I are like you.
I don't know anything about it yet.
I don't want to be one of them.
It's been a while since we've had chouponme
Konba ya yon bouyon or make two kits of men opa men bouyon
It's been a while since I've seen it.
It's going to be a celebration.
Li ren yo no create, they create consonants.
What is the name of the beast?
It's best to rent and enter or exit to get a milkshake.
Beef or beef?
I can't wait to see what you've got going on.
Beef la, cojon.
Gen yon tou is also known as Gen yon tou.
I know how to take pol la
There's a lot to be said for pol to blan.
Pol to blan
I'm not sure who I'm talking about.
Who are you?
The key is to release the langonv.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to keep up with what's going on.
They're starting to come up.
They tell you what's going on.
They don't make dolls at home.
Either that or whatever, I'll call it the same, pitre.
Or is it just now?
How do you want to meet which cells?
Do you want to meet someone like this, or meet someone like me, or grey me, or do you want to do the same thing?
Nou pa grye l, nou grye l, or met l langgrès?
Chode li I know what you're talking about.
As I see it, I'm too diche in the new water.
Men are chabon and men are chabon and boukanne.
They are now available for purchase.
It is a conveyance.
Or cut it off or ban it.
Or do I have a ban on it?
This is the fifth race.
Or I'll set you free now or later.
I'm so proud of everyone who's been there for me.
Why is it that we don't want to be together, how is it that we don't want to be together?
That's why, man, that's why, gen grès.
Where are you now?
What is it now?
So now, what are you doing, San Kochou?
Do you offer, or do you have, or do you have nothing to offer, so that no one will be able to buy from you?
It's going to happen or it's going to happen.
It's not like we're going to have to go to the bathroom or the bathroom.
It's like you're on your own.
They're going to make you feel better.
There is a lot of grass in the grass.
I'm going to make you grey.
I'm very proud of the fact that I'm wearing a coat.
grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or grès or
I'm not the only one who makes sense of it.
Or do I have to make a fool of myself?
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
There's no such thing as the middle of nowhere.
If you want to know more about it, you have to know more about it.
I'll take you to see I'm good enough to have a good night's sleep and a good concert on my lips.
I passed through Greece.
I went through the gr grenn men rele jou yenn li griye, yenn griye.
The equation is not to be confused with the equation itself.
I spent a lot of time in the sun, well, of wine, and wine tason.
If it is large in size, it is very flattering and can be used to make a package of granite.
I don't think you're going to understand the difference between two people.
I'm going to tell you something.
I'm all yours and I know you.
I know you're on the same page as me.
The person with the gene is the same man.
I'm going to tell you something.
I don't know what you're talking about.
How much grenn is grenn?
Are you ready for this?
Okay, now, go to the grenn and grenn and go to the grenn and go.
There is such a great tomorrow, but the woman who is going to be the first, the first, the second, the second, the second, the second, the second, the second, the second, the second, the second, the second, the second, the second, the second, the third, the third, the third, the third, the third, the third, the third, the third, the third, the third, the third, the third, the third, the third, the third, the third, the third, the third, the third, the third, the third, the third,
Bon es bay cochon an, as si gen chè cochon an sa and kole an lè lè six chè.
Annen sa ak rele sa ak kole a befra.
Kochon chechon an
I'm going to try and get a new one.
It's also the birthday of my aunt.
Even if it's just a matter of time before people are happy, people are happy now.
Well, it's okay, if you don't want to go to the bathroom, it's okay if you don't want to go to the bathroom.
I'm going to give you an idea of what's going on here.
It's not like they're going to make a big deal out of it.
Li se kouchou an mèg
Se kouchou an mèg
It's not a problem.
Se kouchou an kouchou and mèg
They're going to be a mess.
It's not like I'm going to travel, it's not like I'm going to travel, it's not like I'm going to travel, it's not like I'm going to travel.
How can you call a sausage nou po yon?
I've always wanted to sell the city.
or know m.
I know m
I don't know what to do with myself.
Or what do you think you're doing?
This is why men are grey cochon an wi.
Se grès kochon an yo Yo rele te w m lòy metan l salt lool wine
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm going to sell a.
Is this the same thing that happened to Andrei?
Li or rache l
It is the same as the Andouy, but men, men, men, men, men, men, women, men, men, women, men, men, women, men, men, men, women, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, women, men, men, women, men, men, women, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men
It's not just a party, it's a party, it's a party, it's a party, it's a party, it's a party, it's a party, it's a party, it's a party, it's a party, it's a party, it's a party, it's a party, it's a party, it's a party, it's a party, it's a party, it's a party, it's a party, it's a party, it's a
The men's side of the aisle.
Se trip kouchou an
Toukou tout sa or nan pye kouchou an
I'm going to do it myself.
Yo granze w packet bi bay, couch jar, se jar l and support couch an.
What's the big deal about a bunch of coyotes?
The men around the granpil viyann bò kouchou an, se bo pallet li.
Pallet Kouchon an, well, mip sifote very much Wiyanl E kwis kouchon an or no de glie l?
kwis kouchon an
Kouchon an pallet kouchon an se l mip sifote Wiyanl kouchon an tou e Nan bef lan kwis kwis
It's a bit of a waste of time.
I don't know because I don't know what to do with myself.
I don't know how fast you're going to get there, but I'm sure you'll be fine.
denmèt kouchon antou
It's a shame that I didn't get to see you again.
It's all in your head.
Anfen, what's next for you, good luggage.
What do you want me to do or what do you want me to do tomorrow?
Why do you want me to buy you a cup of coffee, a cup of coffee, a cup of coffee, a cup of coffee, a cup of coffee, a cup of whatever you need?
Or my husbands, or they sell me good morning Beef?
Or did you sell my good morning?
If you don't want to go to the end of the day, you can't go to the end of the day.
Adam was the second son of Adam.
I don't want to eat too much.
They are called Beef, or Tribb Beef, or Tribb Beef, or Frisil, or Frat, or Tribb Beef, or Bay.
At the mouth of Gradoub bay, the Gouvye Gradou plaque in support of Chayil la appeared.
It's not just the labyrinth, it's the labyrinth, it's the labyrinth, it's the labyrinth, it's the labyrinth, it's the labyrinth, it's the labyrinth, it's the labyrinth, it's the labyrinth, it's the labyrinth, it's the labyrinth, it's the labyrinth, it's the labyrinth, it's the labyrinth, it's the labyrinth, it's the
Yon bavant li too
I'm going to vote for you.
Butte te Beef la
I'm not going to be able to do anything about it, but I'm going to be able to do something about it.
What's the triple?
This is a boy's dream.
It's a great place to start before the pan.
Great pans of beef la Elestomak two fil
As a young man, he was a man of many talents.
This is the gadoub la.
li gadoub la
From the stomach to the stomach.
Good luck to you.
We're not even with him.
That's why I'm here to help you get the most out of your life.
Sooner or later, he's going to be disadvantaged.
How do you fish or eat fish while you're at it?
Two large fish can be caught and cut off from the people who sell them.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I don't know how to pronounce it.
I feel like I'm on my way.
E pa as prason nou.
Are you afraid to sell your boat?
So I sold the bread.
Le, yo was born cankon mwen to prason yo man.
Adin Chevret, Chevret te eta, menge li te eta, pa l Nou pa gen prason is nou.
Well, there's no such thing as a fisherman's fish.
An animal, an animal to be found as I am, an animal to be seen, a crab to be seen, a crab to be seen, a crab to be seen.
E, typewriter, typewriter gounouch, gounouch w ap vwenn gounouch s ap mache nan nou lou a.
No, you won't believe it.
They know it, they know it, they know it.
That's what I'm saying.
They know how to make a mountain out of a molehill.
It's not like that.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
Well, what you don't know right now is what you're talking about, no one's talking about.
Since then, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now
I'm going with the best of the best, how do I manage the scene?
There is nothing new about it.
You are now your old self.
That's what I'm talking about.
Go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom,
Fwi li to use bann nanmi or nanmi
If you put on a white sheet of paper, you'll be able to read the code right now.
I don't know anything about it.
It's gray or grey in color.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
You can eat pistachios, or you can have them, or you can have them on a daily basis.
Or see how all the tobacco is pissed.
Or what kind of cake do you know about?
It's almost as if we're not going to be able to do it.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything about it.
I'd like to thank you for your support.
We're not going to be able to replace them.
In the meantime, let's talk about it.
If you want to rent a house, you have to go to the bathroom.
I'm going to make you a slave.
It's like a pencil is a pencil.
or bay do pi or bay do pi
or bay cake.
or gatwa ap macha a pi
Now we have a new one.
Let's do it with a little handkerchief.
En kobe bay
It's not a bad thing now, it's a bad thing.
I don't know what to do about it.
There is a lot of fanfare in the bay bay bay zanm.
We're not going to do any harm.
It's a new leather.
Now we have a new generation and a new generation.
It's really sweet.
It's like the new rennwa making sweet rache
It's not easy for me right now.
It's easy to say or do.
I'm going to take a look at the car.
Or I'll be back in the car.
Yo konj make sweet milk, sweet wi, yo make milk, yo make milk, yo make lapich tache.
I'll do it with all my friends, and you'll go to war.
So, what's the party now, what's the party?
Two men, two men, is not in front of us, but in the city.
I don't want to be a bus driver, I want to be a bus driver, I want to be a bus driver, I want to be a bus driver, I want to be a bus driver, I want to be a bus driver, I want to be a bus driver, I want to be a bus driver, I want to be a bus driver, I want to be a bus driver, I want to be a bus driver, I want to be a bus driver, I want to be a bus driver, I want to be a bus driver, I want to be a bus driver, I want to
Invitation, or what do you do with a fixed cheque for an invitation?
Would you like to invite me to do a dachshund?
They've been doing this for centuries, and they've been doing it for centuries.
If someone is going to do something like this, they're going to die.
On a large kote yon anti machan k ap vann kleren
Finen nip pase menen nip pase menen nip pase menen nip pase menen nip pase menen nip pase menen nip pase menen nip pase menen nip pase menen nip pase menen nip pase menen nip pase menen nip pase menen nip pase menen nip pase menen nip pase menen
I've asked for a lot of advice.
Some of the men were accompanied by Ibrahim Brèl.
There is a lot of people sitting at home.
They're sitting on their own.
I'm sure you'll be able to count on me.
When I was a kid, I was dressed up as a man.
I'm not counting on you.
This chart can be used for other purposes.
What kind of people do you know?
I'm not sure why I'm here.
I'm going to Zion and I'll be there for you.
I'm going to tell you about it.
What's wrong with me?
In front of an angel, you can have a visa or tatation.
Se Kichore le kankou or the person can be so tall
The first time I saw it, I took it.
I took a glass of water.
First of all, thank you for taking my first drink.
Thank you so much for your help, is it okay?
First of all, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you
Are you an alcoholic or a complete hybride?
The auction of people, the first thanks of clothing, the first half of the day, the first half of the day, the first half of the day, the first half of the day.
If I'm going through the day, I'll thank you for your help.
If only you could say goodbye, if only you could say goodbye, if only you could say goodbye, if only you could say goodbye.
Do we have children?
If you're going to have a good time.
It's on the person's shoulders.
It's either too hot or too cold.
You need to have a passion for cooking.
A goose or two goose.
All of them are new to me and they're bloodthirsty.
If you're going to do this, you're not going to be able to do it right now, you're not going to be able to do it right now.
Do you want to play or try if the person is too shy, as if you were a teenager?
Yes or no, yes or no, yes or no.
If you're going to swallow, swallow.
If you're going to make it or break it, you're going to make it or you're going to break it.
It's either good or bad.
Gen wa wa bon gwojè
Or good luck with it.
And I'm going to tell you about it.
It's not raining.
You will always be able to play the Toujou on the Kounlò people's game against Gout Klèret.
Little papou many Li or papou anything Ki jorele moun sa Fò moutaz antan l konn fwon anti Goute men Y pa
And there are no men.
And that's why I'm here.
I'm going to watch it again.
You can't have someone drink it.
The finen yon appears.
Wine entering the country can also be used to teach the genk lessons.
I seem to know I'm drinking.
I'm going to do it.
They appear to know exactly what they are doing.
or appear in the pets sil brè klen an klen apè l mal
I'm not a father.
So is plase klenen an tou
What's the point of opening the door?
Can you tell if someone is good or bad?
You know a wine or a coffee.
It's not enough.
Men are cloned by a genus.
Or know who they are.
I can't even tell anyone who's going to be a part of the conversation.
Or I'll give you some clothes.
The finances are kept at the library.
He deserves to be punished or punished.
Then there's a change in the book.
Or at the very least, you don't have to be made to believe that everything is going to be all right with you.
So, how can I buy clothes, if I have to buy clothes, how much will they cost me?
Men, I'm going to buy Boko, and I'm going to come back.
I'll leave it on the bottle.
What do you think about buying and selling?
Can we buy a new one?
Why not buy a pair of shoes?
I'll leave it up to you to finish the job.
I'll leave it there and buy it in a bottle.
We can't afford to sell wine.
Nou vann pa gloss.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
What is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it is it, what is it is it, what is it is it, what is it is
Is the issue of who is the poorest of the poor, who is the salt or the clay?
Who among you, even the poor, is the one who drinks, who drinks, who gives you a drink or a drink?
Li vann, li is the month of the month of the month, li is the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month of the month
How people buy people to sell clerks at home, I don't know.
What do you think of me, what do you think of me?
People here, I'm calling the Tafia, traveling and calling the clergy my Tafia.
If you're looking for someone who is willing to travel, go ahead.
I'm with you guys.
Menmen men all men have nothing.
Everybody has something new.
Or you don't know who I'm going to win with.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
and re-release.
How to deal with the winners
What's wrong with a good clergyman?
There's no such thing as a good bottle.
Gen o bon claren nou
Or do you know how to use a console?
This is the first time I've seen it.
Or if you want to buy clerics.
I'm not sure I'll ever be able to do it again.
Yole clérien yo ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro ro
I put it in a bottle.
Lonvi is going to make you eat your own food.
Lonvi akò ejit, koum bout kawod chou, canm the color of a.
I'll say it again, who am I supposed to be?
Enmenan Lonvi yo ale klenyen, Lonvi yo ale klenyen a, li gen dwa bono.
Isn't that a million dollars?
Boukou a, Boukou a win, I bouch in you or cliyen an, gold y ap rle cliyen ap mete l in the bottle.
Boukou sou yo an klisyen, or needyen.
How much do you know?
What's the matter with you?
There are two types of waterfalls in the area.
I'm going to drink.
I don't even know how to drink.
Or if I had a big drink, I'd be watching the video to clarify what's going on.
In fact, it's clear that this is the only way to make sure that people are aware of what's going on in their lives.
I'm sure you'll be able to make it through the day and I'll be there for you.
or rennwa to make a change for li
If he or she understands or understands, he or she will not be able to respond to it.
Men or people like you.
There is no clear force behind it.
or renewed a se w apne clearren
I'm pretty sure I'm going to be a good one.
They're not big enough.
They're really big.
They're good for short shorts.
They are bon dousman.
They're in great shape.
They're like the salt of the earth.
Ap pale and madan Esila and Bonga
Well, now we're off to a good start.
I know how to take care of myself, I know how to take care of myself, I know how to take care of myself, I know how to take care of myself, I know how to take care of myself, I know how to take care of myself, I know how to take care of myself, I know how to take care of myself, I know how to take care of myself, I know how to take care of myself, I know how to take care of myself, I know how to take care of myself, I know how to take care of myself, I know how to take care of myself,
Can you see where they are?
No, I put salt on it, I put salt on it, I put food on it, I put food on it, I put food on it, I put food on it, I put food on it, I put food on it, I put food on it, I put food on it, I put food on it, I put food on it, I put food on it, I put food on it, I put food on it, I put food on it, I put food on it, I put food on it, I put food on it, I put food on it, I put food on
Stand up, stand up, stand up, stand up, stand up, stand up, stand up, stand up and be counted, stand up and be counted, stand up and be counted, stand up and be counted, stand up and be counted, stand up and be counted, stand up and be counted, stand up and be counted, stand up and be counted, stand up and be counted, stand up and be counted, stand up and be counted, stand up and be counted.
Stage a se bay yo put in front of the cabonn
I put it in front of the cabin.
I'm going to put on some of the new ones and I'm going to put on some of the new ones.
It's right in front of the cabin.
Enmen can not relati t ap preparari.
Well, to win, to win, to win, to win, to win.
Sa o gen chak
Or put it back together.
Or put me back on my feet.
Se ou gen rechou a
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to wash it properly.
What kind of people do you think you're talking about?
What kind of food can you eat?
You can put some cement and some gas in a coal mine.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
Men can't be bothered.
How do you know who you are or what you don't know?
Since the beginning of Chabou, it has been owned by Favèm Chabou.
Conba is often referred to as a pen.
I don't know what I'm going to do.
I'm going to be black.
A person who smokes a cigarette is a person who smokes a cigarette.
The people of the bay land.
You're going to have to pay for it.
I'm going to give you an apology.
It's not like you don't know what you're talking about.
This is a new generation.
Now you know what I mean.
There is no such thing as a new dimension.
Will you be able to write all the time?
At the same time, an allowance.
If you don't know what you need, how do you know what you need?
If you're 50 feet tall, well, if you're 50 feet tall, you're going to have to make a living.
Well, is there a plevan van te difo that you don't know what to do?
Men, go with the plevan van te dife a.
No one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one, no one,
Which flanks will they win?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
What can I do for you?
Or to throw the flanks of a pouvanm on the vante li.
Well, what does it mean for you to know what I'm talking about?
or ren bra tabouka
or ren bra café
Se pye kafe y ap die
Or cut off the bra li chech or
Gen si si great by lou yo konn al pray
I know how to pray.
What kind of people are there?
It's a big fly or something.
It's like a big fly or something.
That's why I'm here.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
Or tip my lap.
I'm going to tell you what I believe.
It's a good thing you're not a bad person.
We're going to have to come up with something to put underneath it.
Yo put on a big motorcycle and yo sou l.
Eba gen on nan yo rele big koken motobra yo?
I'm going to cook my motorcycle.
An, on nan kon gen de lye.
Now, they're on the pill.
It's time to move on to the next step.
I'm going to take a pill for you.
I'm going to try to make it to the kitchen.
We're going to have a kitchen.
I'm not sure what you're talking about.
or releasing l.
Now you're ready to put in a do-it-yourself kit, or a do-it-yourself kit, or a do-it-yourself kit.
One of them is a family-owned gallery.
I'm sorry to hear that.
Or make the family a gallows.
It's good, it's good, or it's necessary.
If you're a person, you're the one who's going to do what you want.
There's a lot of people out there who want to do what they want.
There's a lot more to it than that.
Al kache, al ay ki jin bra for my good, I lost my way to ap li.
Alyssa is facing down to the bottom and is carrying my bond so I can get a lime.
Ti fachin bra ouwe
What's the matter with you?
I'm not the only one who doesn't wear a bra to bring your bonuses.
I'm going to have to take a shower, because it's a great place to eat.
Men, let someone raise a price to pay for a timeshare.
Or, in the meantime, and browsing, bring a good mout.
I'll be right there, man.
And you cut the time, and you search, and you bring the bonnet to me.
It's not like I'm going to be able to take a shower.
What kind of water falls on your face, right?
Well, I'd have fallen for it.
The fire fell on the fire and was completely dead, but the fire was bad enough.
Yes, it's a new year, and it's a new one.
Sometimes, you'll see something or put it in your mouth.
Well, as if you win or lose, or lose, or lose again, or lose.
If you don't wear a suit, you're going to do it.
Then, you can wash your face, wash your face, or take vantach, or vante l, to take it.
Or I'll go with the vantach, I'll take it.
What kind of woman do you have to deal with?
It's too much to ask for.
to deposit them or to place them in storage.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I don't want to waste my time here.
I can't wait to see how it goes.
foui edive a la
There's too much gasoline and too much crap.
You can find me.
Yout a la te frayi
One bag is the right one.
If you don't want to do that, you've got to do it right.
Can you ask for a penny or a pound?
Recho gen recho gen anpil or li gen tout
Li gen boutout
There is a reason to choose chob.
Li gen recho chabou
There is a lot to be done.
I'm not going to lie.
Men ki recho grand yon again
Yo ap rakaf or
Or the recho piti.
Do you know if you're going to go to Gad-Gadann or what?
Elwa p made man
I'm going to tell you a story about Yon Bay from where he came from.
As I trained them, I learned how to cook.
What do you think of me?
How can I help you?
Now, as if you were a new coach, as if you were a new coach, as if you were a new coach, as if you were a new coach.
You can do something about it.
And the wine is new to all of us.
The short-lived rivan anlè a
They made a joke.
The same is true of the wine making process and the wine making process.
Do you know how many men you have left?
It's easy to use in the kitchen.
It's a great way to get into the kitchen.
How are you going to kiss her?
It's on the first floor, internship.
Men, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do one, do
If I were to put on a cake or a bunch of things, what would I do?
Are you sure you're going to be able to do it all?
Men have met each other in a cousin's house.
While we're at it now, we're at it.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do next.
It's all about you.
Genitè, bay sa yo.
Gon, kankou, what's the matter with you?
If you don't want to lose weight, if you don't want to lose weight, do you want to lose weight?
Sevèt Bwokit la E Agisanen of mine took me to the water.
In Agisanen there is a water meter.
You don't know how to use a thin layer.
I don't know what to do with myself, I don't know what to do with myself.
A few men and a few aunts kissed each and every one of them.
Don't get too caught up in it too fast.
What's the big deal about water?
Baking water is white.
You've signed up for a new big thing.
There are two great things to do when you're crying and when you're crying.
Blan an an yo.
So I can do something to make you feel better.
It's all in the wraparound.
W plen li zanat and wplat
Where are we going to come from?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results.
As a matter of fact, I'm going to calculate for a cock as if it were a thing.
I'm going to take a look at it and I'm going to take a look at it.
There's a reason I'm a cook.
Now we're going to take a look at it.
Take a look at what they've done.
I'm going to have to come up with a new kit.
I'm not sure I'm going to be able to do that.
It's falling all over the place.
Fare li, man from the kit.
I can't wait to get to know you or do something about it.
E, bon, e, bon, even if we are not alone, are we alone?
Men, don't put yourself in a position where you don't want to be.
Nou netwaye vès or a.
I'm going to take a bath, and I'm going to take a bath.
What's your mommy's name?
Emen great mamit la, n al pran water a, l arelemanmit!
We've spent a gallon of water here, a gallon of water here, and there's nothing the gallon has to do with me.
The man in front of the city is not a man in his own right, but a man in his own right, a man in his own right, a man in his own right, a man in his own right, a man in his own right, a man in his own right, a man in his own right, a man in his own right, a man in his own right, a man in his own right, a man in his own right, a man in his own right, a man in his own right, a man in his own right, a man in his own right.
Then I go to work, bring water and go to work, and then I go to the pit with the towel.
What about a gallon of water?
No, I'm not drinking any water here.
And then there's the garden.
and al wouze jaden
After drinking, you'll be able to drink.
It's the same from the kit.
It's the same kit with the same gallon.
Well, or do you know who came to the garden, what do you take as if you came to the garden and now you are in the garden?
I know how to take it as if I could be weak.
I'm going to act.
I've met you and I'm with you now.
How do we know what the key is?
If so, what is the meaning of life?
If you ever meet, if you ever get married, I'll put you on your plate.
Bonkou rebaray is a syet ki konn clothes yo
Gen rede yo
If I fall and break, I will fall.
It is a dish and a dajan.
It's as if they're putting on a heavy load and releasing it, big-shot, big-shot, big-shot, right?
How do you take off your big bottle?
It's not like I don't know anything about it yet.
Now you know how to laugh, and now you know how to laugh.
Or someone who's been hospitalized.
I'm going to miss you.
I'm going to make a decision.
There are several floors.
I know I can now pay for it.
Gen an releye.
Now they're ready to move on to the next big thing.
Gen yo rede li
Reveal your handkerchief and run on your peyer and put your handkerchief in it.
I know if I cover my hands with it when I come in.
Now I know how to buy machann frita and I know how to win.
I've been covering such a large area of Antil Wi
It's a great day to be alive.
I know how to cover my hands with li
I put on a saucepan soon enough and I put on a mouthpiece.
You will not be able to enter the country.
If you're going to run, I'm going to run.
You've got to be careful with your feet.
It's as if you're having a good meal or putting on a new one.
It was born with an ancestor.
It's a race against the clock.
As a result of this, Akouvri Bòn and Asyètkri were displaced.
I'm going to do it with the king.
Met an anlè souvi an lè lè faire ni pou sienne mouch to enter
You're the same person as you are, and you're the same person as you are.
I'm going to do it again.
That's why I'm here.
I'm here to help you.
Gen kote gil pou te siyouy, sa ak peyè a.
I can't believe it, I can't believe it, I can't believe it, I can't believe it, I can't believe it, I can't believe it, I can't believe it, I can't see it, I can't see it, I can't see it, I can't see it, I can't see it, I can't see it, I can't see it, I can't see it, I can't see it, I can't see it.
Men, they're cold, and they can't move, and they can't move.
If you don't understand, cover your mouth, and talk to people.
In the mouth of men, in the mouth of men, in the mouth of men.
Kouvèt, you are a man.
Men even if they're in the bathroom always want it.
The food and beverage companies are not affected.
E baray or know or know win
as if you were serving someone now.
Or serve someone now.
On the man's wine na ka yo la
Or you can now include it in your votes.
or by the people.
M bay plaque, or service not voted now, as is the plaque.
I'll be at your service.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
No, I'm on the bus, or I'm on the couch.
Well, if you don't want to use the case, then you can use it again.
Baray kompay and tou
The key is to get back to you.
Men like you.
One needs to be prepared to serve the society.
They have everything they have.
Yes, they have an associate, they have a man of many talents.
Well, I've got it all, I've got it all, I've got it all, I've got it all, I've got it all, I've got it all, I've got it all, I've got it all, I've got it all, I've got it all, I've got it all, I've got it all, I've got it all, I've got it all, I've got it all.
Now face it, what about you?
What's the big deal with a three-way tie?
It's you and me.
You are the man of the hour.
It's the same with Ken.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
It's why I love you now that you're here.
What do you want to do with the pilon and what do you want to do with the braw?
I'm not going to be able to do anything else.
I'm going to do it with you.
I did it with brape.
I'll do it with your bra.
Well, as long as you win big, why?
Well, there's a big one, a big one for men.
Do you know how to cook your food?
You've got a lot to lose, and you've got to win.
Yo pile manma, pile pitimi, pile mag.
And then there's you guys, and then there's Phil, and then there's two episodes every day.
I don't know what to do with myself.
If you're going to be burned at the stake, you're going to be burned at the stake.
Why do we have to make sure that the city does not have a ball?
I'm not sure I'm good at it.
This is why I am going to the convention of fouye pilon
Yo men tou on difan and dàn
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it.
I'm going down to the bottom of the ball.
I've got the ball.
I've been thinking about it for a long time.
Well, as if there were things, as if there were things, and as if there were things in the world?
They don't have anything.
Men are not men of the same country.
I don't know how many people are in this country.
Men are not allowed to dance.
If you want to be a mother, you have to be a mother, and if you want to be a daughter, you have to be a mother.
I've seen a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire, a fire
Do, do, do, do, do, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you, do you
In order to get the most out of it, I'm sure you'll be happy with it.
The little ones are born with the same legs and lights in a mattress.
One of them is a kitten.
It's time to get back to school.
Gen yon rebelled against the Rebo epi la
People may be here or there.
The people of the land are the people of the land.
If you're going to be a mother, you're going to be a mother.
If you put your money where your mouth is, you'll get the prize.
Or may pass no one's name to you.
Or you'll pay for it.
It's up to you or anyone else to believe it.
I'm going to have to do better than that.
There are many other causes of death.
The kids are very good at cooking.
or gasoline flow rate.
What's going on with the flow of water?
Or buy a nice piece of cloth.
Or buy a haircut or a short grease for a good cold.
It's a great way to get a feel for yourself.
It's a great place to start.
I can't wait to get a copy of it.
However, there is no evidence to support this claim.
This includes videos and videos.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not, but I'm going to make it.
Empi diride or wash your grease.
Kankou or genlaye, eló needs letwaye, onmay, or bil retyè pa yo soufè.
E men w pwap te la yo or well la pou reyè pwap te
I'm going to be able to go through this with myself.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
Men have to do what they want to do.
or vannen Mai a a a a a
I'm going to give you a prize.
Here's what you're doing behind the scenes.
Or repeat it to me.
Then moul an kont, or pale pate I moul again.
But I'm going to make it big.
I'm going to try to make it big.
Or do I make a big deal out of it?
Or I'll wash the dishes.
Or I'll put on a new pair of jeans.
Or graje manyò kou byen graje, k ap w pass manyò, l ap kliben manyò ka la, nan club se w win l.
Well, then you know how to break down rawout, awout, son of man, break down awout, son of man, or graje l grajan.
Who are you and why?
The medals and medals will be useful for you if you want to use them.
I've always wanted to do this.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
They don't even have an account.
Completely silent, he asked for a long road.
It's just a matter of time before it's done.
I'm going to release it.
Gen w releases pout lan.
l, contach. rele
So, what's up with the menmen now?
What's going on now?
Konn tache la, now another now, now, put l nan vès or in group lat.
Would you like to see a seventh?
Well, you say that, you say that, flat, flat, flat.
No, I'm going to get pregnant.
What I'm going to wear now is going to be a lot of fun.
I'm not going to lie.
Don't live in the same place as a teenager.
I'll either deposit one or I'll deposit one.
E bonba y gen plz you are the one who knows how to prey and now you are the only one who knows how to prey.
Yon men gen bon manchet kouli nou bezan filib
Hey, there's another bay where I'm going to call you.
Or maybe it's just a matter of getting back on track.
Bon gen bay ay komsi.
and gen bay.
Ap has been fouchèt kouto.
I'm now in soup and with good luck.
It's the same with Jan and Jan.
There's nothing I can do about it.
Did I release your bag?
Win the game and you'll win the game.
I've always been a fan of yours.
I know the men who have been there for me.
What's the point of winning a decade?
What do you think I'm doing right now?
Or, thank you very much for doing the right thing.
It's the end of the continent.
If there's anything I can do, I'll take it easy.
or joutye konn pop or rache
How do I get back to cutting again?
I know how to cut, cuff and cuff.
Eonnere choukèt, póman yo rele choukèt?
Wi, make a choukette.
I'm going to put the earth in, put the bullet in, so I can get out.
Well, if I can take it as if I need a video from Kleren, I can see it, and I can see it.
Bonkou win pliz yè manchèt m conservi men
continue to reach men
I'm not going to say anything.
I'm going to give you a big hug.
Then Ginen, Ginen, and alos are in the prize, the prize is in the hands, the prize is in the hands, if not in your country.
My dad and Fanmeris offered me a first-class Creole to try.
In the first prelude three creole creols three menmi, pa dan yon again.
Once again, when the time comes to win, there will be a creepy win.
Men, I am not a branch, I am a branch.
And you, too, are like me.
It's not even Christmas, it's American Creole.
As if you didn't want me to do American Creole.
There are many different types of creole available on the market and there are many different types of creole available on the market.
There are different types of creole and gen
There are many different types of creole.
Alok creole grimen yon on the teeth of a
Who are you?
My grandparents are my mother.
My grandmother is one of those people.
I don't want to make you come out of it.
switched an earlier one.
I've always heard, it's a long time ago, mothers, grandmothers, grandmothers, grandmothers, grandmothers, and so on.
I'll tell you what I'm going to tell you now.
They won't be able to do it again.
They're not like men.
It's all right now.
Li te genyen yon kay distans order from a
Li te yon kay distans mache a
Li te yon kay distances order from you.
It's going to be one of them.
I'm a geek and I want to be a geek and I want to be a geek and I want to be a geek and I want to be a geek and I want to be a geek and I want to be a geek and I want to be a geek and I want to be a geek and I want to be a geek and I want to be a geek and I want to be a geek and I want to be a geek and I want to be a geek and I want to be baptized.
Se yon yon prevident rinit madan Kulo.
Sivin is not alive.
Lapremye, you don't have to listen to me, you don't have to listen to me, you don't have to listen to me, you don't have to listen to me, you don't have to listen to me, you don't have to listen to me, you don't have to listen to me, you don't have to listen to me, you don't have to listen to me, you don't have to listen to me, you don't have to listen to me, you don't have to listen to me.
Mise, madan kounou a t primè bati vit la.
This is the story of Calbas and Eme.
in other countries.
We will never be able to do anything for you or your family.
You will never be able to return to your homeland for the sake of your brothers and sisters.
I know what you mean.
There is no need for renewal.
I don't know if I can post anything.
I can't wait to bring it to you.
Good country or man, good country or man, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country, good country
Mache or Ali is young, do you see the kalbas?
What's the big deal?
Great people are the ones who were there for you.
There are two ways to do this.
A person's appetite is derived from a
People are going to come out with the same or with the same or with the same or with the same or with the same or with the same or with the same or with the same or with the same or with the same or with the same or with the same or with different or with the same or with the same or with the same or with the same or with the same or with the same or with the same or with different or with the same or with the same or with the same or with the same or with the same or with the same or with the same or with the same or with the same or with the
I've heard a lot of people say that it's a big deal.
You're the only one who knows how to get things done.
It's not something I've ever done before.
It's like, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you
A cell that knows how to climb up and down.
I'm going to take a look at it.
You're going to have to go to Gwovi.
I don't even know the name Kobi ak.
There is no touch blanch
Now you have to go to the Serie Trozè.
There's a mile to go to wash your hands of the Bottom, Up and Down, Up and Down, Men, Men, and Whites.
Has anyone ever died in your house?
As long as the moon is dry, the sun is shining.
Matty is the only one who knows.
Oh, well, well, well.
I mean, you're white.
He opens the Koubya console to play the game.
It's time for the party.
With, or cheva l ak ap rini.
Don't be afraid to come and go.
The people of the land of the wine.
Don't worry about it.
The source of the problem is that there is no such thing as wine, as it happens in the city.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
I'll tell you how to do it.
They're going to be nice.
You're going to be able to get the ball in the ballot box.
You want to be included in the calva s the soul of the people
If you're going to talk to me, I'm going to talk to you.
It's a great way to get to know people.
My grandmother's grandmother's grandmother's grandmother's grandmother's grandmother's grandmother.
Kalbas la fè touman w kon an sa
I'm not sure if that's true or not, but I'm sure it's true or not.
It's the only way to go.
Let's talk about the potatoes!
Anbyo andbyo come from the people, they come from within.
He was born near you, and now you are.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
A tout dan.
We'll be there every week, and I'll talk to you.
Is there a child who can say creole to you?
We're going to call you Ginen, and we're going to call you Krale.
You know who you are, because you're the one who's got your head in your pocket.
You're not going to be able to do that.
This is the era of white supremacy.
But no one is going to be able to stop me if you feel sorry for me.
I'm going to grow up, I'm going to grow up, I'm going to grow up, I'm going to grow up, I'm going to grow up, I'm going to grow up, I'm going to grow up, I'm going to grow up, I'm going to grow up, I'm going to grow up, I'm going to grow up, I'm going to grow up, I'm going to grow up, I'm going to grow up, I'm going to grow up, I'm going to grow
Men, please take me to Letou.
I'm going to be a grandmother.
La va, i hear grandmother or n ap di sa.
Men, I don't know what to say, men, I don't know what to say.
If you are a slave, you will be detained as a slave, and if you are a slave, you will be detained as a slave, and if you are a slave, you will be detained as a slave.
Send a message to someone you don't want to see.
Anyone who wants to send me a passport or a passport can't.
I don't know what to do about it.
I've seen other places.
Where do you want me to go?
Is there anything else I can do to save my mother's life, my mother's life, and my life?
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
I always say to myself: Alò
I've heard of it, but I'm still here.
Take it from me, too.
It's your grandmother's turn to tell you.
My grandmother lived there.
My grandmother lived with me.
For my grandmother's sake, I'm going to play the role of Ginen, I'm going to play the role of Maliken.
Yes, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, if you, you, if you
Y was born an an
There's no such thing as a freeze.
I'm going to take my clothes off and my men.
Now we're going to make it to the premiere.
After the United States of America
It's been a while since I've been to the United States.
Sepe is the current president of the party.
He is the current president.
Who is to say that a man is born speaking a foreign language, and what is to be done?
Oh, drink, if the pencil is still there!
Crayon, a granite drink with a pencil and a pencil!
A pencil, a pencil, a pencil, a tooth, gold and wine, and wine with everything.
You're going to have to wait until January.
I'm going to tell my doctor everything about myself.
I don't know how to channel my channels.
I'm going to tell you about it, and I'm going to tell you about it.
If I don't win, I won't win.
I'm going to try and get rid of the bugs.
That's the way it is.
You won't win any more.
If you have a plate of wine with all the countries around you and we all have all the vines or yo wi
He has all eyes or ears or ears or teeth and all glasses.
It's not easy to ask questions.
It's the same with Jan.
The men had to go to the bathroom and eat.
What do you want to win?
There's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
It's the first time they've done it.
You are welcome to the gallows.
They'll welcome you back.
No, I'm not going to see you when I come back from retirement, no, I'm not going to see anyone else.
Li te gre plat dajan, tou pyès, or pati deba yo touj, renèsi pokou.
The invention of the century.
It's not the end of the century.
My mother's defense has always stood the test of time.
For centuries or even centuries.
It's been a while since I've been back.
I'm not going to give you any more money.
Or hear the sound of your money.
I'm going to tell you something new.
The way I know how to put it is to pay the price and the way I know how to put it is to pay the price.
I'm going to tell you about it, but I'm not going to tell you about it.
It's not the same thing.
They have to pay their debts.
There is a difference in the way you look at it.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
Nou santim wouj to be exalted.
Nou centime wouj and 3 centimes
Three cents are more than enough.
The menu is the same as yours.
2 cups of coffee.
I'll give you an example.
It's not just me, it's you, it's me.
You're going to the city.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to do it again or not.
Whether or not you're going to do it, you're not going to do it.
It's only a matter of time.
I'm going to make a bouquet of them.
It's the end of an era.
This is a rule of thumb for wine 3 pi a.
Oh, wow, I'm going to take you to the bathroom.
It's a great leaven and it's good.
I don't know where I'm going, I don't know where I'm going.
People can't choose you, the pill package, the yo-woj.
Since my husband's death, I've never been there.
Have you ever felt like I voted for you so long ago?
If I were you, why would I do it all the same way?
Or the party of men, or the party of men, or the party of men, or the party of men, or the party of men, or the party of men, or the party of men, or the party of men, or the party of men, or the party of men, or the party of men, or the party of men, or the party of men, or the party of men, or the party of men, or the party of men, or the party of men, or the party of men, or the party of men.
A party or a dam that is going to be destroyed will not be able to access the contents of the new one.
It's all about men, but you're not alone.
The contents of the balls and the balls are as follows:
The contents of the men's and women's clothing.
And it's been a while since I've done that.
It can also be used as a substitute for the other ingredients and as a substitute for the other ingredients.
There is no such thing as Kalvas la.
The people of the land are called Kalvas and the priesthood is called Pow.
It's not the same as Adam's.
My grandmother will be pleased with you.
I'm going back to my grandmother again.
Alò grand, yo tout antique people Givi yo te yon.
Moun Jeter, or yon ti you mouchwa waten.
My grandfather, all the Givi people, all the paranm yo, all the Givi people.
Now there is no one to be born again in the new world.
It's a good idea for you to know what you're getting yourself into.
We'll either sell you or we'll sell you or we'll sell you.
You're either selling or going out of business.
From which country or country the men came.
I don't know what to do with myself.
A section or section.
At the same time, the sections of the bladder
Men are taking their pills.
There are many people who don't know what they're talking about.
They don't know what to do about it.
It's all about the people.
I don't know what it is.
They don't know what to do about it.
Li la mouga Madyè on the road
It's all about the money.
It's not about the people, it's about the people.
It's the first time I've ever been in a relationship with a woman.
The two men were walking together.
They know the race.
They'll know about the tizan l.
Are you just so healthy?
Do you know what I want, do you know what I want?
Even if you don't know who you are, you can get out of the way, if you don't know who you are.
I can't say goodbye to a party or a party.
You don't know who the rat is.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm going to tell you a story.
Or you'll end up with a.
A, how can I have grand olik yo, myen men, can they?
Be a man, now, as if a man, be an American, be an American, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man, be a man
Here I am, here I am, here I am, here I am, here I am, here I am, here I am.
It's not the end of the century.
They'll come in.
One hundred years ago, one hundred years ago, one hundred years ago, one hundred years ago, one hundred years ago, one hundred years ago, one hundred years ago, one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years ago one hundred years
How many of your children have been born before?
Who is the newborn, and who is the newborn?
Viyat pa yon lòt
What's good for the people?
There is a good chance that you'll be able to find your way to the top.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do with it.
I'm on my way.
The sections are long-lasting, long-lasting, and residual.
Anlèv amen mwen p ap kachonje tout, kachonje tout, the grandmother will know to the president everything.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it again, or if I'm going to make it again.
Chazan again or wap ben
But you know how to get up ahead of time.
Yo menmi is very well known.
A person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
It's a good idea to find a nation we're willing to serve.
If you're going to have a good time, you're going to have a good time, and you're going to have a good time.
If there are people who are dying, they will die.
You are a man of good will to all men.
And it's not like I'm the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's
Patizan person sa yo se yo te tiyenbo w bay sa yo yo yo yo even if yo teyenbo or va ben
It's going to be good.
I'm going to tell you what to do and how to do it.
What or what can I do to help you?
I can tell you what I want you to know, know, voice or gen promache to know.
I'm not going to lie to you.
Yo te fanach
I'm going to try to get a new one.
If you die in water, the matter is in water.
It's the only way to eat it.
And then you die.
And then there's the water.
And when I'm underwater, I'm back.
underwater.
I'm going to cover it all.
All your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your brothers, all your
It's the same with me.
Before the graph, I know this as a simple one.
Take the time to yourself and everyone else.
Well, it was a long time ago, and it wasn't, and it wasn't, and it wasn't, and it wasn't, and it wasn't, and it wasn't.
Anpase or gen kounm zi la
One of them is a ponytail.
Esitivou yon kounm kavan below
Don't let anyone tell you that you're not going to be able to keep up with what you're doing.
Esitivou yon kay tan
I want to be able to do something about it.
I want people to know.
The journey has come to an end.
I was born on this day.
Yon al knows who you are before you know.
You'll be fine and you'll be able to call people before you go.
It's the first time I've ever been in a relationship with a mathematician.
This is why I'm here to help you.
I'm going to have to take a look at this and I'm going to have a look at this and I'm going to have a look at this and I'm going to have a look at this and I'm going to have a look at this and I'm going to have a look at this and I'm going to have a look at this and I'm going to have a look at this and I'm going to have a look at this and I'm going to have a look at this and I'm going to have a look at this and I'm
They are gen tonbou.
Yes, everything is money, even money.
There's only one thing to do in my life, and that's money.
You can also do what you can and do what you can.
So what, you're the only one in my family?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
Tonbwa is the first m.
The universe is the first m.
Everything is yours.
Who are you?
You don't have to die long before you die.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm here to help you.
I've been waiting for you.
I can't put my finger on it anymore.
And then there was Kenvi An.
The death of Munchè y gen moun lafra
The retina is closed.
For the sake of my soul, do you not want to be great too?
If you listen to me, you will be commanded to be a child of God.
If you are a child of God, man, you are born to be a child of God.
Commander, I'm here to help, I'm here to help, I'm here to help, I'm here to help, I'm here to help, I'm here to help, I'm here to help, I'm here to help, I'm here to help, I'm here to help, I'm here to help, I'm here to help, I'm here to help, I'm here to help, I'm here to help, I'm here to help.
I'm sure you'll be able to use it.
Or how do you know what you're doing?
What's wrong with leglip too?
After all, it's easy for them to burn everything as if it were still there.
This is the church.
So, I'm going to church.
Alansè since then has come from all over the world.
Since the end of the 19th century, it has been possible to evoke it elsewhere in the world.
Because I'm dead or something.
Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
One way is to serve the church, the other way is to serve the chafa.
Servi w kote treli malantan
W to use below
In addition to hearing loss, there is also a high level of hearing loss.
There's a lot more to it than that.
Have you come, or is there a commanding officer?
Chak pék vini bay koumandman pa l, chak pék vini bay koumandman pa la, you, you, you, you, what religion is this?
If you want to be a member of a religion, you have to be religious.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
The lawful protestant order is the same.
It's a great way to get to know others.
I don't have any problem with using religion, and I don't have any problem with religion.
Now we're on our way.
There's no such thing as a kay
There's no such thing as a human being.
We are now Catholics.
It's all in the family.
You can't kill or kill anyone.
I don't know what my family or I don't know.
I don't know all the people who are rich.
You're not going to be able to keep up with new people.
If you are not Catholic, you are not Catholic.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
We're here for you.
My mother and I counted in men.
moun isid le ye
Isid is the cause of good people.
I don't know what to do with myself.
It's not the first time I've done this.
Whether I am right or wrong, no one is going to be able to stop me.
Alò, i menman Manmagon, i you are not a man As a te o, se yi t with man Manmagon.
Who, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what,
You're the only one who has it all.
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to keep up with my dad's good looks.
I'm going to tell you about it.
We were all in creole.
There is also a lot of creole and other creole that can be used by someone like you.
It's not the end of the world.
How do they compare to each other?
Now in the form in which they have maintained a monopoly and an an
in the form of li noumen
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it.
Do you know if it's a handkerchief or a kitchen knife?
or a cuff for use in men's kitchens.
It's not going to happen.
You're going to have a knife, a knife and a knife, even a handkerchief.
Now, no gravye bout zab, no compè bi yè bout bra.
Men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and women, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and women, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and women, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and men, and
You've got to make a difference.
I wish I hadn't done it before.
Or for a handkerchief or with a handkerchief.
Or you can do it too.
It's only a decade old.
It's too much to ask for.
What kind of work can they do or put a price on themselves?
I'd like to thank you very much.
Tra, I love the maryen!
Kè mè, love the maryen!
Now, I'm going to tell you all about it.
I'm always on the lookout for water and I'm always on the lookout for water.
I'm going to have to get out of here to get some water.
I was able to get water from the lake.
They're not here.
As a result of this, there is no money to be made.
There is a place where you can get a great deal of attention so that you can be a part of the church.
We'll be going to the church and we'll be going to the church and we'll be going to the church.
It's the only thing I can think of.
There's a clock that's almost right across the street from the church.
And I'm going to take care of you.
I know how to buy everything new.
The men approached him and asked him to leave.
I'm going to get rid of the kit.
We're going to get to know each other on a regular basis.
I'm going to release it.
Wherever the world is, I'm going to take this water.
or Nan tou.
I don't know if I can take blood.
And then there's your place, there's your place, there's your place, there's your place, there's your place, there's your place, there's your place, there's your place, there's your place, there's your place, there's your place, there's your place, there's your place, there's your place, there's your place, there's your place, there's your place, there's your place, there's your place, there's your place, there's your
What do you think or what do you think?
And then there's the genie.
One more year, one more year, one more year.
Se yon pov bay right.
See, Belo, Belo is the one who can help you.
And where am I going to wash my clothes, what can I do?
If you don't know me, you don't know me, you don't know me, you don't know me, you don't know me, you don't know me, you don't know me, you don't know me, you don't know me, you don't know me, you don't know me, you don't know me, you don't know me, you don't know me, you don't know me, you don't know me, you don't know me, you don't know me
How can I wash my clothes to make them beautiful, or not?
They're going to go.
And if I have a pair of pants, I'm going to have to wash them, and I'm going to eat them all.
There is no such thing as bad luck.
I'm not draining the salt water.
Now I'm going to fight with two fighters.
And we don't know what's going on behind the scenes.
Now you know how to get rid of your rad and clean it up and do it perfectly.
Now that we're done with it, we're going to be happy.
It's not like we're going to get any better than that.
It's not going to be easy.
High school and junior high.
How can I do something like a mother?
Just like that, I've been drinking a lot of water.
In the end, we're going to have soap and soap and soap and soap and then we're going to have soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and soap and so
I don't know what to do with myself.
In the meantime, can any of the new rads be installed?
Is there anything you can do about it?
Well, you know, you're a redhead or something.
Yon men rafi a la
The boy fell on his face.
Vanm anm dirad la genye la.
If you are not familiar with it, a rad lan yon la, anmen tach la, a savò in Sevan tach la, ap aclowòs la, or retire the tache.
E rad, wa dirad dan tache?
Wi, tache, tache, tache, or gen Yon would like to thank you.
Panku le or lavad rad la koujou is said to be in the life of the man.
Before I drink wine, the wine takes on a different color.
He knows how much you need to know.
Many or many of you have come to the conclusion that there is no such thing as a free lunch.
It's time to put a stop to the end of the road.
How am I supposed to get this water?
What other men would come to the water like this?
If I'm going to vote and I'm not going to vote, I don't know what I'm going to do.
I don't know if it's the right thing to do, or the right thing to do, but I don't know if it's the right thing to do.
I took the colour well, as in Koubou, where I had new clothes, and now I have soap and handkerchiefs.
You're going to play it cool.
It's a bit of a blast from the past.
I'm going to use soap and water.
I'm going to use soap again.
Wet glò blayi a ladan t to put in the faba klo as.
If I'm in the factory, if I'm in the kitchen for years, I'm going to have to retire.
If you are vans adlat
and vans adlat.
and vans adl Si men rad la
I'm going to remove some water and put it in the sun.
You said, "I'm going to go for a walk".
Well, you know, if you're not, you're not going to be around much longer.
I'm here today and I'm here for you.
Sirad is not here, pijande, is Rad not here?
In the meantime, they're going to be salty.
As a kankou rad, it is now your turn.
The water fell on my face.
I'm going to put the palm tree in my hand and I'm going to put it in my hand and I'm going to put it in my hand and I'm going to put it in my hand and I'm going to put it in my hand and I'm going to put it in my hand and I'm going to put it in my hand and I'm going to put it in my hand and I'm going to put it in my hand and I'm going to put it in my hand and I'm going to put it in my hand and I'm
Or are you there?
It's either rain or shine, or hunger or thirst, or pay in due course, or harvest in due time, or wet water.
Magon rad, or benye met l feche, or not touni, how do you do it?
Nan Bon, what's the point of playing chess?
What do you do with the sound, what do you do with it?
If you have a gout ann li
It's not that big of a deal.
You have a good grade.
When I graduated from high school, I wanted to be a teacher.
Metal is a very short distance away from the surface.
What are you waiting for?
I'm sorry to hear that.
Alas, if you pass there, I'll meet there, pass there with a drone.
So, I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do, for the sea.
Now you can do what you want, Raden.
What is it, andreth?
It's either two, two, two, two, two, or it's all over.
Or an angel is an angel that will do it for you.
Or a scan of it?
Now that I've told you, why do you do it?
What is the idea, or the end of it, or the end of it, or the end of it, or the end of it, or the end of it, or the end of it, or the end of it, or the end of it, or the end of it, or the end of it, or the end of it, or the end of it, or the end of it, or the end of it, or the end of it, or the end of it, or the end of it, or the end of it, or the end of it, or the end of it, or
They're going to have to call you.
It's worth noting that we've been able to find a way to make the most of it.
My eyes are more open than mine.
I'm going to do something about it.
Let's get to know each other.
Pache w pache l Comen damage to the code?
When you're in a hurry, you're in a hurry, you're in a hurry, you're in a hurry, you're in a hurry, you're in a hurry, you're in a hurry, you're in a hurry, you're in a hurry, you're in a hurry, you're in a hurry, you're in a hurry, you're in a hurry, you're in a hurry, you're in a hurry.
The color of the shirt is good, but the color of the shirt is not bad.
Can you tell me what it's like to be on your feet?
It's more than enough for me.
Kiswah is not the only city in the world.
The family is now making a stand at Anpél
win de lave.
Amandou, or will or will I meet lamin dan nan rad la?
What did I do?
You know, it's a big deal.
The epi or epi spleen is present.
New clothes and clean clothes.
I'm going to be able to put on a wheelchair for the rest of my life.
or wouze li
I'm going to set up a place.
They don't know what to do with it.
When I first met Chabonn, I was very impressed with him.
We are preparing for Sivan Rad La.
or prepare the paper pouch.
Sivan Rad is a tea or preparation of san papye a.
A, or do you work in the city?
It's the same with all the men in the car.
I don't know the name OU Gade
The men of the deity of Gade
It's the only thing I can do for you.
They are known as the Sibians.
That's why I'm here.
The men are either head or tail Sibiè
It's all in your head.
I'm going to have to go back to where I came from.
You're going to have to pay for everything you've got.
They've got it all figured out.
Li tout lò Kankou before won rad
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
Where I win an ak wou
What do you think about it?
I'll take a quick look first.
Kankou sou bon rad
benzyon rad la santi bon dou
Benzyon poup is not allowed to enter the radar.
Kiswa ak kiswa w lave li
It's the first time I've been to the other side.
It's okay, but we're going to dance and we're going to wash them.
I've been waiting for you to enter Ladann.
It's not easy to enter Ladann.
I'm sure you'll be able to enjoy the good old days.
Have you ever washed a rad a siton?
What is it, especially what is it, or what is it like to live here?
E, revetive, how do you know?
No, I don't know what that means.
An, t ap te bel vinè.
It's your child's generation.
I can't get enough of my grandmother's cabin.
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to do that.
My son is a great-grandfather.
I'm not going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you
Are you going to use the bathroom as a place of rest or as a place of rest?
I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you, I'm with you.
Silna Kouchèt, where am I now?
I'm very busy here.
I'm not going to tell you.
If you're going to be able to do it, you're going to be able to do it.
This is your generation.
I'm going to have to clean up the mess.
I'm going to use the bathroom.
Who's the boss?
Someone who knows or is well-versed in what they can do.
I want to know how I can keep myself clean.
I've been waiting for you to come out of the closet.
When I'm in the bathroom, I'm clean.
It's a ball of powder.
In the meantime, I'm going to make sure I'm ready for it.
I've spent a few nights like this.
Take it or leave it.
I'm not going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you
Take me to your room.
We are preparing the lake.
It's not like I don't know who they are.
E kichan rele baile, or baile lakou?
Dance, dance, dance, dance, and dance.
Or who's going to pitch in?
No, I won't.
Have a seat.
Do you have any idea about the ballet and the ballet?
Wi, if even baray la.
How do you get a tax on ten men, and what do you do?
No, that's right, the savann.
It's like you're talking about people.
on the people of Kiyiz
I can't afford to retire at the end of the season.
or good flon kote or good flon kote
He retired from the ballet.
When men get out, when men get out of the way, when they get out of the way.
Why don't we go?
One day as Reni, one day as Reni, one day as Maou, they'll be all mine.
They've got a big foot in their mouths.
A, I'm going to talk to your branch.
If you're not good enough, you're not good enough, you're not good enough.
When the kids are young, they're rich, they're good, they see everything about tran nan kay la, as they say they don't know.
And, I've never seen a man who can't re-read or re-read me again.
The end of rad la pay mal fell on your face, how do you like it?
The men's watches are very cold and they are very good at passing or riding.
I'm going to tell you a little bit more about it.
I'm glad to hear you're here.
I'm not sure if I'm ready or not.
It's not a good idea to make a mistake.
I'm going to have to go through a lot of scanning to see if I'm going to miss you.
It's all about the bay.
I'm sure you'll be able to make it as white as possible.
I've been doing this for a while now.
I'm also a new wine maker, I'm also a new wine maker.
Who's the newest wine with nou kay?
There is no such thing as a man who creates the world.
A dreamer of dreams, a man of dreams, a man of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams, a woman of dreams,
Want to know how to do it all?
I don't want to be the only one who's right.
I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a woman,
It's not even a matter of time, it's just a matter of time.
How do you know who you are?
The water consists of the same water as the land in the sea.
Why do you think your boss knows me?
What's wrong with you?
E, bay la, e.
What is the name of the drug Nivasil?
I'm in the mood for something special.
I don't want to be a beast.
All animals are born with a cell.
All animals and their genes are cell-bound.
The gene of the animal is the gene of the cell.
The genes of animals and cells.
Gen p menmi Chèt gen
It's a great way to get rid of it.
Gen pi vivte
There are two of them in Badem.
I don't know what to call it.
I thank you for being so kind to me.
What is it?
It's a lot of fun to watch.
All of this is done in the same way as you do in the same way.
My grandchildren and great-grandchildren.
How do I call L.?
And then, man, when you have children, when you have children, when you have children, when you have children, when you have children, when you have children, when you have children, when you have children, when you have children, when you have children, when you have children, when you have children, when you have children, when you have children, when you have children, when you have children, when you have children, when you have children, when you have children.
E, e, mal pou l la, how can i sing it now?
How many of you do I know?
I can't say that, but how can I?
I'm going to tell you this, and I'm going to tell you what to drink.
It's not like the phone, it's like the gas, it's like the gas, it's like the gas, it's like the gas, it's like the gas, it's like the gas, it's like the gas, it's like the gas, it's like the gas, it's like the gas, it's like the gas, it's like the gas, it's like the gas, it's like the gas, it's like the gas, it's like the gas, it's like the gas
What else do you know?
It's all right, it's all right, it's all right, it's all right.
Or do you know who I can call Zenga?
It's the same, and it's the same, and it's the same, and it's the same, and it's the same, and it's the same, and it's the same, and it's the same, and it's the same, and it's the same, and it's the same, and it's the same, and it's the same, and it's the same, and it's the same, and it's the same.
It's the first thing I've ever done.
It's the other way around.
I'm so sorry to hear about you.
I don't want to make a phone call.
You are very good.
You're very good at it.
It's a ton of fun.
Mwen tadma a, where are you?
I've always thought about it.
Who is a tadma a
Yon Ghonbèt li gen en kou long
They know how to use the name M ap tom of an animal.
Li gen kou long
They're a great team.
And you're in a big place as if you're in a big water, you know?
I don't know what I'm saying.
In the voice of the voice.
He is the son of a priest.
Can't you tell me what to do?
How can you do that?
What is the birthright of a person, or the birthright of a person, to be born in the country of his birth?
For the sake of the country, there is no harm to the country, there is no harm to the country.
I'm not going to let you down.
I'm not going to give you another new one.
I'm going to call you back, man.
Don't worry about it when it comes to popping up again.
Well, now I'm going to tell you about Esyl, and I'm going to tell you all about it.
Men, for the moment, e, wap, wap, what is the meaning of tab di nou On kokk kisan an plim nan koul, how do you relate to me?
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
They are the same.
E-beast and remen now 1 beast are born portrait chat
They are white in other colors as well.
They know what they're doing now.
They're calling the codes.
Now, I'm thinking about it, but now they're doing it.
So, what's your take on the pen?
Well, that's a pity, and I'm going to call it a pity.
Wi konshondin konshendin mawon an man now li
Non konshondin mawon apa
A good and complete poultry is the crop of the crop.
The pool is full of children.
Men, they beat, they beat, they give birth to children.
Will I be able to get married?
Is it a mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, mother-in-law, or mother-in-law?
But I've been able to do that for a long time.
I'm more than happy to be here.
Then I'll call them all by their vote.
They've got plenty of wine to drink, and they've got plenty to drink.
But I can't see them.
Well, if there's one thing you can do about it, then vote for it.
Sa, yon yon son laden me anrele l.
Embellish a young Andedani with a white head, so that you can make a living from it.
If I cross the border with the children of Ladann li too
It's not even while they're full.
They're going to kill each and every one of you and they're going to throw you away for a while.
Li bay ik zifre an, dek ba moun kouzikou.
Well, they're brothers, and if I repeat the cover, they're good.
Yeah, well, I'm fine, how are you going to do that?
It's not the end of the world.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
I've been waiting for you to do too much of this.
Laj pou l'ap song.
And why do you think I'm doing too much?
Sing them a song.
And as if I could, I thought I'd be the one to take a cell over.
It's not like I'm here.
or met hand at hand in order to do the right thing.
I've got my hands on them, and they're walking around like they're here.
Put them back in their boxes and make sure they're there.
They are descended from the anvanth li
Let's get to the bottom of it.
Then they took them down to the bottom of the stairs.
They're in the valley of Manya down.
They've been banned for a week.
It's been a week and a half.
I'm going to try to get my hands on Atya.
Well, as long as I'm here, I'm here to help.
It's not just me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me.
When I put them in, I put them in for a month or I put them in for a month or so.
Well, if you're going to do that, what's your name?
Koute y alomi are you the same?
Well, if you're going to be able to do it, you're going to be able to do it.
I'm going to sleep.
I'm writing and I'm writing.
I'm writing to tell you what I can do.
I'm going to write a letter to you.
It's the only way to do it.
How can we at the end of the day get to know each other better?
We don't know where to look, but we're here to help, but we don't want to take everything away from the people who are there.
Do you know what you can do now?
Now they're just like the rest of us.
It's hard to believe that you've done it before.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah,
Can they have children, or can they have children?
I gave birth to the same child after the birth of the same child, after the birth of the same mother.
Hey, kankou, how do you know if I'm going to give birth to a baby?
Kouchon plen, now.
It's a big deal, but it's not a big deal.
I'm going to do the same thing.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
And now I know where I'm going, and I'm going to tell you.
I don't know where I'm going now, but I'm on my way.
It's a two-way street.
I'm just sick of it and I'm going to make you feel better about it.
The fyi Van wondre yon grele pespos l in
The post office is in.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
Well, it's as if my cremen are there, on the animal's own cell I'm not sure about.
It's good to be back in order again.
Now I know what it's like.
They will be able to return to their ancestors.
There is no win in the grandmangous relay.
With mangoes and peas.
and releasing mangoes.
Mèt volay an
Once again, I know that I've been chatting.
The mangoes are the same as they are, even the Baja Mel.
In fact, the mangoes come from all over the world.
There are some of the same mangoes that come out of it or some of them are flying.
It's been a long time coming.
There are several ways to travel.
Blanch, you're good to go.
Don't tell the mangoes if they're on the animal side.
I'm going to be a goose.
It's all right with you.
Chatting with a friend.
Wi sa macha atè y ap men kat.
So why don't you just write me a letter, and I'll tell you what?
Sa rele Mato, sa rele Mato is ready for me, krenk?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
Matthew, who is also the head of Paul, is the author of the book.
And, of course, there's a lot of stuff in the trunk.
E sa, yes you win.
I can't wait to get back to you.
When I was a kid, I met my grandmother.
It's not even the size of your head.
One of the main reasons for this is that it's not a good idea.
The good news is that you're not going to lose weight.
A gen rede sa t long nan.
Now I know, now I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I
So, what do you think, how many times do you think I'm going to die?
Wi, yowere l kouwon, wi kouwon, kouwon nan.
Esau, as I stood there, as I stood there, there was an answer to his footsteps.
Well, as if I'd never been able to get back to you.
I can't wait to see it as soon as possible.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything for the rest of my life.
Yo pa rele pat
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to say.
There are many people out there who say I'm sorry.
or re-release pat.
Or call them Pat Pi to tell them what to do.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Well, it's a two-tiered lance and I know how to take your gold with me.
Plim pou l.
I've never been there before and I'm not here now.
You've got a lot of things to do.
Bèt kisou is very old.
Andidann and yo
If you're going to be on your own right now, you're going to be on your own right now.
I'm with Paul and I'm with you.
In the meantime, I'm going to try to make more money.
It's not like we're going to have a baby.
It's not about the cells.
Wip, wip, mou peyè, m'ap te kap blanch.
When the grapes are white, the grapes are thrown away, and the grapes are also white.
This is my soul.
I can't believe I won't fit in too well.
It's too much of a fit.
They are also used in soley.
I'm the type of brother in the laundry room.
I'm going to help you.
Egon Madi can also be used to treat some illnesses.
It's bad and everything is bad and everything is bad.
I've always wanted to win.
It's the same disease that affects the cell.
That's what I'm doing to you.
What is the same disease?
Men, call yourselves the same, the disease of the little one.
If you have seven children, you will be able to give birth to them, or if you have one child, you will be able to give birth to them.
Well, here's where I'm going, and I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
Y pa plen, zyi a pa plen.
I'll tell you what, if anything, I'm not going to tell you.
I don't know who I am.
You know, I know you're there.
They're good.
Now, well, I can't afford to do it again.
Well, as if Ella, as if I were to die, or if I were to die, or if I put a white stone underneath me, what would you say?
One release or put it underneath the surface of the skin.
You can't just sit on the couch.
We're not going to be able to afford it.
What race do you want to do, a party or a party?
Celebrate or celebrate, but do something about it.
Enmen, are they there, why are they here?
Or how many times?
You know I'm running.
Well, why do I take all the time I have to stand, and what's the point?
And then when I think of everything, there's a wind and a wind and a wind and a wind and a wind and a wind and a wind and a wind and a wind and a wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind and wind
I'm looking forward to seeing everything that's going to happen.
They're running out of money.
If you want to do it, you can do it.
They're running away from each other.
If you want to know the children of the people who will drink wine for the children of the anti-Klav, you too.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
I'm confident that I'll be able to give birth and bless the lives of those around me.
They do it.
I'm on my way to do it.
Li yon rele rele bri sa.
I'm going to grangou lè lè
When you're hungry, men, when you're hungry.
Well, now that it's not like that, let's go, let's go.
Or swab for a crash and for a breakdown.
The output of the gas is generated by the gas.
Guys, now I'm going to have a clutch in my mouth and I'm going to say, "M, or two clutches and I'm going to have a clutch in my mouth?"
Non you want now a, now a good, man or man or father or, you want to look at gankou, gankou!
Bouchou is still very much alive and well.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
But now, if someone agrees with me, I'm not going to.
The men or the counts are now a
If they do or don't, they can read it now.
What's the big difference in how much water do you have?
One man now so e e w ap imagine men now so congjou congjou will sond direct a new thing to a new thing to feel men
A breath of fresh air to make Nobont w ap pran se will set before or will now be right now.
O santou will now now now sa ki yon santou
Ap feast Kond now.
What do you know?
In the meantime, I'm in a hurry with him.
Well, now that you've got it, what do you know?
Will you get it now, then or now from one year to the next?
I know you're in shape.
Now I know what to do with myself.
Se fanon or relapse.
O san tou vi in the form
And now I'm ready to go.
To know or not to need a body.
It's the only thing I can do.
Tot plen, bon, ouy or who are you now passing by?
Sa rele lavarich lagou mandis are now too much.
Eden is one of them.
One person is now very much alive.
Gen o la now a pool of people as a
Now we have a lot of passion.
You're the only one who knows.
Men, men, men, who are not.
Who is the one with the title?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
I'm going to Vegas.
Do I know Wondi who is Aloufa?
Aloufa, let them pass by.
Well, it's going to be fine now.
I'm doing too much now or not as I'm giving everyone the benefit of the doubt.
Now is the time for the rest of the world.
I'm running now as I am.
Anmen is now resting.
And then there's the rest of us now.
We can't be too far away from each other.
It's been a while since I've seen one or two people.
It can be used by several people.
It's not as flat as it is flat.
The bay is also known as a flat bay.
And I'm not going to lie, I'm not going to lie, I'm not going to lie.
Well, if you're going to drink on water, you're going to have a lot of fun.
The use of soap or vinegar is not a bad thing.
I'm going down the hallway to the lesann makri epi epi epi
You're going to die or you're going to die.
Or you're going to have a lot of trouble.
It's all in vain.
Well, a kankou can be for rice or flour, soybeans or seeds.
Then, as if you're fresh, or you've seen it, or you've seen it, or you're going to have it.
Well, that's right, I'm going to go now, or I'm going to go now, I'm going to go now.
I am now a great father.
Li pa gen gwo o pap now
They don't know what they're doing anymore.
They're too big to fit in your mouth.
I've got a lot of people who want to know what I'm doing.
Men are different from each other.
It's not the end of the world.
One after the other.
E bakou la wap now yon
One of the greener pistachios.
I'm not sure what to do with it.
One grenn may
There's a lot of difference between men.
The men will go to the wolf.
I've got a lot of people on my mind.
If you win, you win as well.
as si bon bon
You can't beat yourself up.
There is no such thing as an epiphany.
I think it's a good idea to have a good one.
Bonkagou, the end of the world is coming or the end of the world is coming, what are you doing?
Men, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you, people like you.
Do you know how to do good and how to do good?
This is one of the best women I've ever known.
What a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman to be a good woman.
They're going to do it.
Or how do they go about it?
They wanted to see it.
If you're going to do it right now, you're going to do it right now.
Or something, or a good coffee, or even an idea.
Or do you want to put a cell phone in a box and you know what to do with it?
Can I please, can I please, can I be sure?
Well, is there a consistent little thing for you?
And, so, how do you say thank you?
They can eat things as if they were green, and then they're green, and then they're green, and they're good.
Or do you want to buy your baby?
Or is it too late?
Or, if they don't, they're going to die.
The men are poor.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to do that.
They're either too much or too much.
It's either as a sauce or a sauce.
Fin manj yon mango vè tri swap palon man nou ou di
What's the big deal with the bottle and the bottle?
They're going to break up.
I'm not going to lie to you.
I'm going to do something like this.
Why don't you tell me who you are?
What do you think of me?
Men, how are you?
No, as if I were a being, or something or I belonged to a man, or a being, to a man.
Men, sa k pa men, la fò m.
Where are they, where are they?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
The Kankou bra is a
I'm going to do it this way or I'm going to do it this way.
Or passing men's shoes.
We're going to have to go through the men's section.
Or they feel like they're dead.
They're on the verge of collapse.
I'm not going to lie to you.
Not only that, but they're still alive.
The men who passed through the Monsovian were killed.
It's a very important part of life.
Either way, there's a lot more to it than that.
Or he'll want to get away with it.
Either now, or later, they're better off, they're better off, they're better off, they're better off.
Men, they're good to cook, they're too poor to cook.
Or what kind of defense?
Wi men, wi.
Yon-suk, you know what I'm talking about.
Man, how good is your gift, or how happy is your birthday, and what is your gift?
Wi kankou bon
on rad o bay do
As you know, I'm doing very well.
What do you like about it?
Well, how about now or mango, mango or mango?
Or now san reyek, nou w ap di or now mango sa?
If they are safe and secure, no matter where I am or where I am, I will not live in them.
It's always been that way.
I don't know what to say to you.
I will continue my work and make sure that I am able to do so.
As good as it gets on stage.
Wonm pi for Ketavya
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
If you want to build a factory, how can you build a factory?
If you want to go through the factory, I don't know if you can make two people.
When you're in the middle of it, you're too close to death.
Men, as if you didn't know where you were going, as if you didn't know where you were going.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
Really, really, I don't know where I'm from Gwen, because I don't know how to make a hat, do I?
There is no one who can win your soul, but you can do it.
You know what I mean.
I'm going to tell you.
They're good, they're good, they're good, they're good, I don't know, they're cold.
If you don't put anything on me, I'll give it to you.
I'm very proud of you.
I'm so much more than that.
You're going to have to cut me loose.
I'm going to tell you.
I'm going to tell you.
You have to deal with them.
People drink wine at home or in the bathroom.
Or put a new one on it.
or m ap di
It's not just men, it's men.
Who do you think you are?
Or someone who's been drinking at home or if I deserve a drink.
You're the one who's been there.
As if I know how to eat, I'm ready.
How do you know how to prepare me?
Aerial devices, which are devices that are ready to be used?
I'm going to watch it.
One of them is open, one of them is ready, one of them is ready, one of them is open on the table.
When it comes down to it, the devil is my enemy.
Yeah, well, yeah, if you're going to put on your lunch, put on more time to get a good wine.
But I don't want you to know more about me, to understand me.
What are you going to do to me?
Men, invest in this, I don't understand.
I don't understand, but when I'm back, there's a big plan.
Do you have anything to do with alonbik?
Well, that's a great thing I know how to do.
The group was formed by a group of people who met in Saarele Boko Wai.
I've never seen a movie before, and I've never seen a movie before.
Can you call a pony a dimen pony?
How do you know if you're wearing a ponytail or if you're not wearing a ponytail?
I'm going to put some clothes on it.
What about the clothes we wear?
And tafia, two tafia with li, se tafia a byl.
Lord have clothes, Lord have clothes, Lord have clothes, and if you don't wear them again, wear them again.
Bon, bon, gen de kayite yon moutou fari, bon m, yo called yon m order bò, yè sa ka privarisya, ken rele l?
Anmen yon m, yon m order from a.
I don't want to be in a new country.
It's a good idea to take a two-minute trip from the other side of the country.
They won't be able to keep up with what's going on in their country.
People come from other countries, but they don't sell the same Boko, so what's the point?
Well, are they even at the end of the beach, are they at the end of the beach, are they at the end of the beach and what?
Li Le Fowonm is one of them.
Good luck to you.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
One of the most important things to do is to keep an eye on them.
I'm sure you'll find a way to get to the end of the beach and you'll be fine.
Yes, I'm not going to leave you at home, but I'm not going to leave you at home.
Bon baye konn fan again and bon
They put electricity in it.
They are white in colour.
Let's get to know each other.
Well, I don't know why I'm sitting here.
Genmou, I can do it, but I can't do it.
In addition to this, it is possible to use the powdered form.
Is this a trap for you?
Ouwi, I'm going to put some herbal dough on it.
I'm going to make a cup of coffee.
Where's the trap?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
Don't even put on a leaf, or a dress trap, or drink it.
Where's the trap?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
They're still here.
The men of Bou and Le Ren are both soulmates.
On those who refrain from drinking creamy and unleavened bread.
I've been drinking creamy water for a while.
You've got to go to the bathroom.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
There are no people who won't drink.
and drink and drink and drink and drink and drink.
Who should drink it?
The man, who is also known as Saffron Gouman.
Do you drink too much?
They drink a lot.
Sa w great man lavaris.
There's nothing wrong with them, there's nothing wrong with them.
Is there anything else that you can do about it?
When I get on the train, they're too much.
Touk sou line li.
I'm also on the line.
E, bon wou man as you kiss, as a birthday li konzake, w ap di l?
I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do,
Good people, good people, good people, good people.
Now we're on the right track.
It's on the right, and then it's going to break in front of you.
Folks, I'm on my way.
Anyone with a stick, leave it alone.
I don't want to leave them in the dark, but I want them to be there.
They're not going to take it anymore.
Vikiyan li pran tanke Kè fou is the name of the game.
I'm going to make a mess of it.
It's a large pool.
Li, what's the big deal?
On the two men I made a man in the world and I will continue the same.
I'm going to see where it is.
on moun wa kifou
and fin bref.
If there are two people who are going to kill themselves, why not?
Men, if you can chase me, give me water for this man's head.
Who are you?
W ap di people sa a pa nan people ni sit again
We've seen the video and the water before.
You want to be able to get rid of it quickly.
Whe, bon, koukouk ou ye, what are you going to say to the Sai people again?
I'm going to be the one who's going to do it.
I can't afford to pay even the new one.
I'm not going to do anything.
You can't use it.
Now let's move on to the next step.
You've got a lot more than you'll ever get.
Fin drink, what are you drinking?
What is the meaning of a person's soul?
How much of a person's life is spent on you, and how much of a person's life is spent on you?
Who's behind your soul?
Who am I or who am I after?
Or do you want to know who will be there?
An will break now.
What are you going to do?
Who is going to break it?
I'm not going to say no again.
What is the meaning of life?
Now, I'm not going to say anything, but if someone wants to get past you, just do it.
Men are looking for a white militia.
A garrison of militant white supremacists with him.
or graje li
Or I'll give you a piece of cloth or they'll be free.
If I can't see it, I can't see it.
It's just that I'm not a fan of the code anymore.
I've seen a lot of people crying, and I've seen a lot of people crying.
Well, I've been doing a lot of dating, dating, dating and dating.
Who are you, and who are you?
Do you know where I am?
So, yes, there's nothing wrong with that, except that it's just a matter of life, death, death, death.
I'm going to make you a fan of this country.
Release the life of the frape m
I'm going to release it.
Li Kollafra is a member of the A
They know what they need.
I don't know what you're talking about.
I'm going to keep going.
It's as if I'm making cream.
I know I'm a fan.
I know I'm in a boat.
They're running again.
There are three types of doud.
I don't want to eat a sandwich or a sauce.
If the same cream is touyou san or souse a
It's the same cream as touyou
All the creams are made of paper.
If you can have a cream of beef or a cream of wine, or if you want to have a cream of beef, you can have a cream of beef.
Hey, doll or gen, I'm retired.
He said, "We're going to have coffee".
I don't know if I'll let you know how much coffee I'm drinking.
Coffee coffee n pedisant li, pa gen bon san tanko.
Genkó enmen is too long to make it to the shore.
"Would you like to do something special?
It's the same bay, and it's worth it.
E vivante vagip bòsout!
Well, there's no fin grye to make you drink wine, right?
Men with fine gray hair can do a lot.
I'm going to make it to the end of the gray.
Or do it again.
Or I'll put it here.
O'Reilly was born before you were born.
Or the holy sheep in front of you.
Lok men cafe a vin fen men
Or put in a cave with a lot of water or a pile of li
Or pass them through the passage.
K ap or bet make coffee.
Or I'll wash the dishes or clean the dishes.
It can be made from coffee beans or grapefruit.
Or a ball or a coffee or a nice one.
It's all about how you want to win.
Gen ou café tyè w w
Or put on coffee and make a cup of coffee.
And I'm going to put on coffee and coffee.
I've been waiting for you and I've been waiting for you.
I am a member of the Society.
Or they'll show you a video to get an idea of what's going on.
Or a video cafe where you can do it.
If you drink too much, you can't drink too much.
I'm addicted to everything and everything and I drink too much.
There are many men and women who know a lot of things.
You've been through so much.
I'm going to give them an order.
But it deserves to be ordered.
sou o gen move gas
It can be made of wood or granite.
It's either big or small.
Or you can do it for adults.
Whether it's time or fear, it's time to move on.
I didn't want to keep it.
Keep them or keep them.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
Or, at least, if you want to.
Is there anything you can do to prevent this from happening?
Do you like coffee too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much, too much
If I'm going to fight, I'm going to fight.
Kankou and menmen
It's good to be able to make coffee.
As a general rule, it is not always possible to do so.
It's not like I don't want to talk about it anymore.
People who know how to take care of themselves.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
The men are gray.
As a result, it is not possible to make a single glass of wine or to make a glass of wine.
Or to make a wine without it.
They are referred to as grenn.
I don't know how to take a woman like that.
Or you'll be able to get in touch with others in a timely manner.
Or I can do what I want to do with my coffee and I can do what I want to do with my life.
Or you can't tell me what to do next.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
It is a large pouch or two that covers grammatically the same size.
You're going to have to do something about it, and you're going to have to do something about it.
Well, who's going to do it, or who's going to do it?
It's a man's world.
W ap mete rad jou or si or or priyen enpe
It's too late for that.
Take your time or water and send it to your home.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it.
I met rad jou or something.
Or you can use a bike, or you can use a new one.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
With the peace of the mouth of Cephas, I will send you to me.
You know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
Tila, avoid releasing the baby.
What do you mean, who met your soul?
If you get up there and meet someone who doesn't cry, you cry.
Yo yo Sa said yo chemi z
When you're in your pants, you're in your pants, you're in your pants, you're in your pants, you're in your pants, you're in your pants, you're in your pants, you're in your pants, you're in your pants, you're in your pants, you're in your pants, you're in your pants, you're in your pants, you're in your pants, you're in your pants, you're in your pants, you're in your pants, you're in your pants
As a man, you will be able to buy a mout or an outlet.
It's your genius.
Men or will buy rads.
Well, you can either retrieve Dezabi yo, or put on this rad.
It's your birthday and I'm glad you're here.
I want to win the race.
Men will be released on the day of their birthday and they will be able to put their hands on you.
It's my birthday and it's my birthday.
One of the pope's commands is to kill.
Bou anpè kouwou, who rad e Moun rad as si ki gen labri, yon di rad sa?
They're clean, they're salty, they're salty, they're salty, and they're clean.
You don't know, you don't know, you don't know, you don't know, you don't know, you don't know, you don't know, you don't know, you don't know, you don't know, you don't know, you don't know, you don't know, you don't know, you don't know, you don't know, you don't know, you don't know, you don't know, you don't know, you don't know,
I don't need to wash, I don't need to wash.
Wili byen washa, e men or lou di ko ta Rad la tache.
Well, then, what's the point, what's the point, what's the point?
Good and bad people who wear rad, kankou or gedyo, wear radzan.
It's the way it's going to be for years to come.
Direc yo te radichon o wi rad gede yo rad age
Pa gen mwen kon nabi ye chak abi the same jagede as si yo tè nou mete rad or wi
I can't wait to get my hands on it.
I'm a few years old.
I'm mad at you, I'm mad at you, I'm mad at you, I'm mad at you, I'm mad at you, I'm mad at you, I'm mad at you, I'm mad at you, I'm mad at you, I'm mad at you, I'm mad at you, I'm mad at you, I'm mad at you, I'm mad at you, I'm mad at you, I'm mad at you, I'm mad at you, I'm mad at you,
Zaka Ali and Abyen together at the age of Ramon di radich y wi.
It is called Zaka Bòk.
or good rad men
Bring me chak jou If you're ready to go to a party, then you're ready to go to a party.
Boku, if you are a Bodo, you are a Bodo and you are a Fret, what will happen if you are a Bodo and you are a Bodo?
The person who owes the debt is the person who owes the debt.
It's not just people who want to pay their bills, it's people who want to pay their bills, it's people who want to pay their bills, it's people who want to pay their bills, it's people who want to pay their bills, it's people who want to pay their bills, it's people who want to pay their bills, it's people who want to pay their bills, it's people who want to pay their bills, it's people who want to pay their bills, it's people
I feel like I'm the same person.
It's the same place as li.
It's as if I can tell you what to do.
or p ap and nothing
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it or not.
I'm going to tell you about Chalbè.
The men or se Tron Body is the throne of Lbè Lbè in tou
The men were also killed in the attack.
jan or rele l.
They're putting things together in a way that people can relate to.
There is no one who is not good enough.
Who won't be able to do it?
Nothing more and nothing more.
They won't be able to keep up with the demands of the police.
As a radio order chire and mache sou m
Who's going to win?
What is it like to be a human being?
If they want to make a difference in their lives, they don't have other farms to set up.
What is the radius of radius?
Yon wè chire
Avoid other boulmetes or boulmetes.
It's not like I'm in love with you anymore.
I love you so much I love you so much.
I'm more than happy to be with you.
That's what they're going to do.
On a fleet of people like you.
If they are too big or too big, they are too big.
You don't know who you are.
Or someone who is too busy.
Or both of them are buried.
Confi as si
I'm going to tell you all about it, and I'm going to tell you all about it.
Lito rete nenpòd jan
You're the one who got Enmeliman and I'm the one who got Hey
I'm glad to see you.
What do you want to do or how do you want to do it?
Enmen rad sa rad sa or li rad la or rad kan fit
Li or do sa or do li
And the people who are willing to do the right thing.
Or, yes, men who don't put themselves in a rad form, men who rarely put themselves in a rad form.
A friend or a friend who loves you can't help but love you as a brother or sister.
The genome of the le genome.
I'm not sure where I'm going but I'm sure you'll like it.
I'm not a brother.
Rari nepot and jan
who are the people.
The men are on their way.
Either they bear fruit, good, or those who always bear fruit, or those who always bear fruit, but they do not have the means to do so.
And if they're still there, they're always there.
There are always people who love to talk about medicine.
We are the ones who have the power to change the world.
There are too many of them.
A person who has a good or bad reputation must also have a bad reputation.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
One of the reasons for this is that the cost of living is too high.
They won't let anyone get away with it.
There is no one to blame.
Or do something that people don't want to do.
Or give a man a hand or give him a hand.
When a man finds himself on the verge of losing his soul, when he turns, he turns, he turns, he does not know what to do.
I'm old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you're old, you
months or more.
It's not like I'm going to be able to keep up with them.
or pa ganyen.
I'm looking for a beautiful piece of cloth.
I'm going to console, I'm going to put on the rad, and I'm going to change it for the better.
Every time I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind, I change my mind
That's the way it is.
Bon gen, baray as if you were dressed so you could buy a piece of gold from your demon douz to a relem Souwa, Souwa a..
Well, well, I'm not even going to say goodbye to my soul.
Wear a loumari head that is elastic and reusable.
E on twal kanj or sa t ban li
What do you think of me?
Sila, I'm not going to lie.
Or do I use it?
Wi, ki anrede l, tegal.
Bou, or the convoy weave as if to make it dry and li pi to be, li kenme cho?
li kenme cho a
We are ready to go to sea.
The rite decalite gen in
I'm going to release marin
When it comes to mout li nou.
Well, it's been a long time coming, and I'm going to call it quits.
Now, I'm going to call you and tell you what I'm going to do next.
E, mwen yon yè gwo twal, kankou sa t tou an, jen rele ble, rele gwo ble.
Yeah, well, it's a big cotton cloth, what's up?
Is it a large cotton cloth?
Do you want to know how many people are there?
Yes, there are two men I know of.
I told him I was going to call Enjen and Sophie.
I'm going to tell you what to do about it.
It's the same engine.
How am I supposed to know again?
How am I supposed to know who he is again?
And what else do you know?
What else do you know?
What else do you know that I know about, what kind of genes do we have?
There are all kinds of colors, lots of colors, because the person wears the cloth is the one who wears it.
I'm sure you'll be able to get a copy of it yourself.
It can be found underneath a
Methane is a chemical compound.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to do it again.
I'm in the mood for something.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I'm also looking forward to the next one.
I'm going to try to make it up to you.
I'm wearing it too.
And, take the talons and E Bon Edé are cut short, what's the meaning?
What's wrong with me?
Gen bon on ti banayi moun konn mete ki mare as si konn sete anakuit or tache senti m
It's a lot of money.
Men are not racist.
Men's clothing is not the same as men's clothing, and men's clothing is not the same as men's clothing.
It's either coming or going.
I'm wearing shorts.
Jan an rele deja ti wi Pwont Alo Long, and ti babyle rakon mete lè y al bèyen Sa rele Chòt, Chòt ou.
It can be as if a person or a bay or a gen wotè or
I'm going to take my pants off and I'm not going to take my pants off.
I'm not going to lie.
I'm going to put my pants on.
Sa demi releasing trousers.
Enlè as si o bon pòt ta lan
It's as if the person puts you in the same position as the person or person you're in the same situation with.
You're going to have to do it and you're going to have to do it again.
And then there's the cloth, and then there's the cloth, and then there's the cloth, and then there's the cloth, and then there's the cloth, and then there's the cloth, and then there's the cloth, and then there's the cloth, and then there's the cloth, and then there's the cloth, and then there's the cloth, and then there's the cloth, and then there's the cloth, and then there's the cloth, and then there's the cloth, and then there's the
Or that he or she is someone else, or that he or she is someone else.
Or two by number, or if it's good or bad.
It's either wrong or wrong.
It was a clear cloth.
It's unclear whether or not it's clear.
It's not easy.
Well, why would a man put on a pair of shoes or a pair of glasses?
There's something I'd like to do as well as the Pantheon men.
It's not like anyone else is going to be able to do it.
I'm going to release the code.
Re-release, re-release and re-release.
What's going on with you and me?
or li, sa astik.
As you win baray e Ma yo sa, yo gen releè the same.
Don't call me a foreigner, I will call you a foreigner.
Either you're too cold, or you're too cold, or you're too cold, or you're too cold.
E, or as you are called Maria Fredi tou, you are tapreye Maria Fredi, yo t ap di?
The aliens are leaving.
The men are good.
There are many people who know how to use it as if they were clicking on it.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do that.
If you're going to say yes, I'm going to say yes.
What is it?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
They know how cold they are wise for the people of Ebelo
You can do it with a large kitchen.
It's the only thing I can do for you.
They differ a.
Bon, kozou, is Sanda doing your tankalout, one of your releases.
I'm going to try to find a solution.
I'm going to do this for you.
So much so, that you have to come from abroad.
rede sa Sanda la
What are you talking about?
Well, I'm with the new vanin sandal.
Yoon bo yo an yo?
In this way, you will be able to believe in your tank until the end.
That's the way it is.
Why can't we wear sandals outside?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
I'm going to do it together and I'm going to do it again and again.
Well, take it easy, as if you're not wearing your net, give me your sandals.
Ezekiel's sandal is in the saddle.
And there is no other way out of it, and there is no other way out of it.
Bon, what's the matter with you?
M, I'm going to go to the bathroom and I'm going to go to the bathroom, I'm going to go to the bathroom.
Do you think you're going to need it?
If you're wise, you'll always be there.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it all again.
That's why I'm here.
I'm in the mood for something like this.
I'm not going to do this.
or sea elastic la
If it is elastic, it can drive in the lab.
Or I'm going to set you up.
I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results.
I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results.
I'll leave them alone.
What's the big deal on this bay?
The two of them, the elastic men, the seven of them, the two of them.
I'm going to release the 7th and it's good.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
One of them is releasing Si la.
Chonsa t li is called Genè or gen 2 gen
One of them is going to get married.
They are finely long.
I was born into a beautiful railroad family.
Chak pran se deparatè boute a, pran darama.
Pandya cooked everything upstairs and took the man.
No, as Chile will be who it is?
or retrograde.
I'm going to wear Elastic Kenbyl.
They're all in the same boat.
As you put it.
I'm sure you'll be able to see the same thing.
I'll be back in a little while, I don't know.
What's under the towel?
You're under the hood.
It's a great feeling to be able to do this for you.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do this for a long time.
I can't help it.
W ap pale de tèt ou di ou gen sou lye lan te ou
Men or women who have met a year ago.
You're going to have to put your feet on the ground or in the cold for lunch or dinner.
Bonkankou, why do you want to call me by my name?
I've been waiting for a few months for you.
Tell me how you're going to make it in the limelight.
They're in the limelight.
I'm with you guys.
Do you know who they are again?
Or throw your money away, and bring it to your father's house.
Where am I, or where am I again, where do you think you are?
Where is the money, where is the money?
Either the second one is good, or the third one is good.
I'm not going to lie to you.
This is the key to success.
Bagen your keys and feet.
I'm going to be in the middle of something.
Well, is there a lot of relay?
Sa rele Soun, sila, kako, how it works at home.
Sa k met your li, sa tout fi tout met your li.
It's not that simple.
If you're going to release your soul, you're going to die.
You're the son of a bitch.
Enmen sa re re l no kosay
It's not even on the coast.
Well, yes, it is.
E, since you haven't met your soul, a man wearing pants than a man I met with as a soul?
I've been waiting for you to meet me.
I'm going back to work again and I'm going back to work again.
as if they were dead or alive.
I'm not sure what's causing it.
They've got a lot to say.
They've got a lot on their minds.
It is a boud chip.
Well, salmi te yon kole will be jeep lan, where are you going?
Anlè a rele, yon kòw sa a.
What kind of children do you have that you can't get enough of?
What do you think?
No, as it can be re-released?
Anlè vat li has released a sa
Kosay or mete anlè rele
As a psalmist, I have been praying for you.
They are in the right place at the right time.
Well, let's get on with it.
Eee, under the radar.
It's the only way to save money.
There's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
It's the other way around.
They put the other one with them.
I'm not going to put a boutique on it.
Well, it's good to know that you're underneath the other guy, and that's okay, you're underneath the other guy.
It's not the other way around.
I'm going to tell you something about it.
Below is a list of some of them.
What's the matter with you?
You're right, I'm going to kill you!
Men, or women, do not marry themselves, if they do not marry the words?
Or I'll have to go.
Or leave them alone.
Or I'll offer you to come back to me.
Now I know what I'm talking about.
What's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up, what's up?
And men, what's your cheerleader or what?
What about a man who is wearing a bracelet, a woman who is wearing a bracelet, and a woman who is wearing a bracelet?
I knew I was going to be a mother of Mouka.
One of the Mouka's marriages.
What kind of economy is there?
One bout moucho y ap, one bout moucho y ap yo mare li, yo boukante bout la yo maril kons a.
What's the matter with you, Mr. Mouka, what's the matter with you, Mr. Maril?
An, mese chèl vò a nou nada Mouka wi, yo maril kons a.
But when I got to the front of the house, I was crying all over the place.
Many of them have been diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease and have been diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease.
As if I could live or die.
Now I've come to the end of it.
E, a, people don't know where they're coming from.
Deba te lekon.
Well, there's a lot more to it than that, fyen run li.
Bon bay, what's the big deal?
M, yes, mout.
Well, what is the matter with you, what is the matter with you, what is the matter with you, what is the matter with you, what is the matter with you?
The Egyptians, however, acted as if they knew what was wrong with their family.
Put them in the blue.
I am the penitent.
It's not like I'm on the radar.
The person who wins is the one who gets it.
As a result of this, we are very pleased with the results.
I put rad in my soul.
I'm glad to hear it.
Yes or no, I'll be in the bay.
It's called the Bay of Pigs.
I know you'll be glad to see me.
and releasing rads?
I can't see the color.
How can I wear my white rad?
What do you want to do?
If you're a white man, if you're an old man, if you're an old man.
I've had a lot of fun doing it and I've had a lot of fun doing it.
After finishing the new kit, you'll have a new one.
After 2 hours again, the job will be the first of its kind in a long time.
You don't know where you're going.
Well, yeah, since you're radip con mesye e, what's up with you?
Well, if you're white, you can walk with it.
It's not like it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world, it's the end of the world.
Are you ready for this?
The end of the day, you're going to have to take it with you for a month, a month, a month, or even a month.
It's not like you don't have a wheelchair, you don't have a wheelchair, or you don't have a wheelchair.
I know I've met your man to make you beautiful.
If you want to vote for gwen chen
Release the gene.
I'm going to release your bra.
I'm wearing my bra.
Sa rele mout
There is no repair mout
Men as if they were human beings.
It would be as if they hadn't known about it.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
I don't know about Bras.
I don't know any of the other members.
Because you know I'm going to be the one to make it big.
There is no release date yet.
It's a great way to get back together.
All foreigners and travelers are in the same bag as Mokalitè.
I'm going to read it as a piece of advice.
Pa gen lòt non Gen convè quality
There is no such thing as a good foreign country.
They're good enough.
There are many ways to live your life.
E, ban, if you consider passing a baray and a bouch yo an bouch, men wine or wouj, what do you do?
Let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let
When you're done, you're on your way.
Do you know what to do?
There's no such thing as a bad boy, but I'm a good boy, and you're a bad boy.
I don't know what to do with you.
I know what I'm going to do with my life in March.
I'm not a man, but I'm a man.
I don't know what to do with myself and I won't do it again.
I'm going to March.
I don't want to do that.
And brother bouchou pou nou blood the red, rezen, how do you call me?
They're wearing a bra.
I don't know if I could have done it better.
It's a good idea to put it in the fridge.
What do you think of the two of them?
Bon comme si koukou
I'm going to tell you again what to do.
Bense makes you beautiful.
I'm going to tell you what to do and how to do it.
I can't wait to see it.
I don't even know what to do with myself.
2 days M table li
What is this table?
Men, even the cardinals, even the pawns.
We're going to have a lot of room in the plant, well, we're going to have a lot of room in the plant.
The men were very nice to you, but they didn't trust me.
If you're going to make a big change, what's your accommodation?
Men, and so, as I call them, so do you who are now in the world.
I don't have any other men.
If you want to go out and throw a knife or a knife, you can't throw a knife or a knife.
You don't have to send someone before you can get to that point.
The head of the car is on the men's side.
Yote bay orderye ahead of you.
And then there's the fact that it's hard to do, and it's hard to do.
In Boujou, where do you find the boujon, or where do you find the boujon in this corner?
Boujou, flèch, flèch conundrum, flèch conundrum, kindness and relaying of boujon, is there any way to relay the boujon in this conundrum?
No, after all, I don't know what to do with myself, I don't know what to do with myself, if I know what to do with myself.
He is among those who have come to me.
I can't wait to see what you're up to.
In the midst of it all, I've seen it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it.
In the midst of all these, in the midst of all these, there is a long, long, and winning streak.
Are you ready to call me back?
Rèmi tan kannd, mi tan kannd nan and menipi lang, where to find a.
When it comes down to it, such as the end of a plant, the challenge is to cut it down.
Or the criteria for releasing the phone as soon as it is released.
There will be no further or final debate.
The battery itself can be recharged.
This is the epou kontri
It's the first time I've seen it.
If not, then not everything can be perfect, not everything can be perfect.
And when it comes right down to it, it's called flch knock men.
It was the last bout ever.
My grandmother and I are going to be together for the rest of the day.
Or where to put a pack of leaves.
It's the last place a.k.a.
This is the separation angle.
I'm sure you'll be pleased with the outcome.
I've been awarded the prestigious pous an
This is a poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy poppy pop
The second shot is cut to the end and the second shot is re-released.
Release the second colorot.
It's not the same, it's the same, it's the same, it's the same, it's the same, it's the same, it's the same, it's the same, it's the same, it's the same, it's the same, it's the same, it's the same, it's the same, it's the same, it's the same, it's the same, it's the same, it's the same, it's the same, it's the same
Crete or Crete, the two monuments are in the same spot, and I'm not the only one.
Is there a crete to cut gold, or a crete to cut gold, or a crete to cut gold, or is there a crete to cut gold, or is there a crete to cut gold, or is there a crete to cut gold, or is there a crete to cut gold, or is there a crete to cut gold, or is there a crete to cut gold, or is there a crete to cut gold, or is there a crete to cut gold, or is there a crete to cut gold, or is there a crete to cut gold?
Eski sa yo rele chouch kann, chouch, rasin?
I don't know if it's true, but it's the end.
How can this stand, so is the end, can yo okre?
Kweve a, li kouche, can nou bouje, can nou fi.
Or I'll tell you all about it.
mouche and kouche
or fouye on tou
Find a plan and get it right.
If you want to take it, or if you want to make wine, you can plant another plant on your own.
Or double the record.
The ecoto redouble the release of sa
It's a great place to relax.
I'm sure you'll be able to use the plant as well.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm going to tell you something.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
The words or phrases are spoken in different languages.
Or you can do it.
How are you going to get out of here, get out of here, get out of here, get out of here?
For the sake of the men's team.
Or for the sake of jelly.
It's the birth of a man.
It's like a birthday party or a birthday party.
It's a celebration of life.
or k areese l
or k arese
or pass men or netwa of
I'm going to pray.
There is no way to know what to do with the net.
It's easy to get caught up in the way things are going.
or retention.
Like I said so or like I said no.
It's not just me, it's my dad, it's my dad.
Depo with jenmi li pap pous an again.
Either you use the nepot and the passe or you use the big one and you take the plankann and the pike and the tea.
Either way, Jan, or don't put me in a hurry to get back to you.
And then there's a plan to do it right, or put it down.
Did I put a plan in there and put you in a crib like a crib?
No, I can't put it down.
One such person, one such person, one such person, one such person, one such person, one such person, one such person, one such person, one such person, one such person, one such person, one such person, one such person, one such person, one such person, one such person, one such person, one such person, one such person, one such person, one such person, one such person for the people.
One person on four poses, one person on four poses.
One of the four poses, one of the four poses.
He knows that, they are on the ground.
It is possible for the child to grow up in the same way as the child to grow up in the same way.
And it didn't grow so big.
I cheti pa gen lavini
This can lead to good wines.
There is no such thing as a zero-sum game.
Now you can do the same.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
Men conttu de douk E lèu or pante field an an wè kande yo yo pa pa pa pa o kousedri or yon ti pye isi jadoj ouke
Jadoj i jouke.
Jadon jouke, jadon jouke.
I'm going to have to go back to the drawing board.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
You're going to get a clean slate.
It's your own job.
This is how you can make a living.
When I was so young, I could drink a lot of wine.
When I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying
When I get ready, I'm going to print my pencil, and then I'm going to use it.
If you're not a grandmother, can you go for a drink?
The wine is made from doughnuts.
I'm going to drink wine and I'm going to drink wine and I'm going to drink wine and I'm going to drink wine and I'm going to drink wine and I'm going to drink wine and I'm going to drink wine and I'm going to drink wine and I'm going to drink wine and I'm going to drink wine and I'm going to drink wine and I'm going to drink wine and I'm going to drink wine and I'm going to drink wine and I'm going to drink wine and I'm going to drink
Or they can't do it again.
It is a very fine container.
I have a pouch of flèch.
Or cut off a new one.
It's a great way to make wine.
He knew it was time to move on, but when he got there, he didn't want to move on.
Or to say that people don't know each other at the same time.
Or take a cup of tea with you.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm going to use it.
or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten or bay ke nou ten
or bay li a a a
I'm not going to lie to you.
There is a new generation of force.
Ik al apòte ak ouvay.
Will I be able to retire from my job?
In the past, there has been no change in the methodology.
How long have you been on the road?
Either way, I can't wait to get started.
When they can reach the end of the line or the end of the line, they leave the flag.
They fill all the tea, they take all the tea, they take all the tea, they take all the tea, they take all the tea, they take all the tea, they take all the tea, they take all the tea, they double it.
You can't do that.
I don't know if it's the same or if it's the same.
I can't wait to see what happens next.
It's not like they're going to get away with it.
Wi, se sa, same jan.
What, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what,
Do you want me to pick you up?
We cycled up.
You can't just stand up straight and cut it.
It's a new one.
He or she is rache
Or you can take it with you.
This is how I'm going to do it.
A or le or o or rache kann nou
If you can't do that, you can end up with a consensus.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything about it.
It's not my dad's.
Or can I put it back on or replace it?
Li redekal or poor.
Well, if you're poor, what are you doing?
Or cut off the l..
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
I'm going to make sure that I'm comfortable with a reduction in my income.
I can't wait to see what everyone else is going to do.
That's why I'm here.
Now I'm not cutting anyone off.
What kind of people can be cut off?
Who can afford to rent travayan?
No, it's not work.
Are you ready to go to the bathroom?
There is no new pearl when you buy it.
When you're gone, you're working hard to make a living.
What do you do, and what do you cut, a cuff, a cuff, a cuff, a cuff, a cuff?
Is it a handkerchief or a tool?
If you want to wear a mask, you can wear a mask if you want to wear a mask, or if you don't want to wear a mask, you can wear a mask if you don't want to.
No, you can do it right away.
Even if you cut a few.
Couple mom, don't eat, plant the plant, place the plant, plan the plant.
I don't want to lose my passion.
I don't want to or I don't want to.
Or you want to make me go through with it or you want to make me go through with it.
Now, in order for me to pass you by, I'm going to do what I'm supposed to do.
Whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa
You're going to have to wait until I'm gone.
I don't know what to do with myself.
So much so that it's raining cats and dogs.
I'm trying to protect him.
I'm at your mother's house and I've seen people come in and talk to you, and you answer in it.
I'm at home.
I'm an old child.
And it's not like people don't want to hear about it.
I'm with you too.
I'm going to end up cutting it like this.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to get the privileges.
I'm going to change them.
This is the story of maryan travayan.
The people of maryan are travayan
The men's team looks like they're making a difference.
My father and I are getting married.
If you don't have the code, why do you have it?
I'm going to tell you a secret.
It's a great way to stay up to date.
After the wine is drunk.
I was listening to the radio.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to talk about it.
Even if you can't drink the wine, you can't drink the wine.
If you don't have a head, you don't have a head, you don't have a head, you don't have a head, no, you don't have a head.
Well, now they can't.
Li pa gen bay lans pou peze kann m, va gen.
Now you don't have to sign your contract.
It's not like I don't know what's going on.
I'm now in Kenskop.
maryal van in mach
It's all about everything.
They're going to win.
And when there are Sikwis, there are great people like you.
This is how you run the Sikwis.
I don't know what to do with the two of them.
I don't know what I'd do if I were you.
Non foot bra non foot bra
Yo manche zoryen an epi ladan
I've got a lot of people down here.
Anyone can stand up for their own sake.
People are dancing on their own.
The same app applies to those who serve the people.
And then there are the tanks.
It's like releasing an arrow, releasing an arrow, releasing an arrow.
I don't want to record Zoriyan but I want to be able to do it.
It's a big deal and it's a big deal.
I'm going to make a new fountain at the bottom.
Zoriyan is also a man of Zoriyan.
And then there's a lot of people.
And for a man to stand before you in a man's hand.
All tea and up to the point of being crushed.
It's not the same as Tjoka.
Are we the same?
If you're going to do this, you're going to have to do some work, you're going to have to do it yourself.
I'm sorry to hear about you.
Ever since my grandfather's death, I've been in a relationship with a man.
Or do I know where I am?
I don't know what I'm talking about.
Before you know it, you'll have to wear your bra.
It's the same thing with a lot of people.
I'm going to come here and talk to you about what's going on.
I'm going to try and get some people to know me.
The men were standing on their knees.
Who or what of the Canne?
It's the people who use it from the bottom up.
There are people who serve or even stand on the shoulders of others.
Or they can support them.
Desann tonme nan bès ou
where M is the number of moles in the table.
The table of contents is the table of contents of the table of contents.
I'm going to have to go back to you.
When I'm finished, I'm ready to go.
That's why I'm here.
I'm not going to be able to do anything about it.
You're going to go through the langre
The man who was the father of the flood and the man who was the father of the flood and the man who was the father of the flood and the man who was the father of the flood and the man who was the father of the flood and the man who was the father of the flood and the man who was the father of the flood and the man who was the father of the flood and the man who was the father of the flood and the man who was the father of the flood and the man who was the father of the flood.
I'm going to see my dad's face again.
There is no pressure.
I know how to make you feel when you're alone.
You're drunk, you're drunk, you're drunk, and you've been drinking since you've been drunk, you've been drinking since you've been drunk, you've been drinking since you've been drunk, you've been drinking since you've been drunk, you've been drinking since you've been drunk, you've been drinking since you've been drunk, you've been drinking since you've been drunk, you've been drinking since you've been drunk, you've been drinking since you've been drunk.
Is there a way to learn, or is there a way to learn, or is there a way to learn?
Do you think there is such a thing as wine or even wine?
Bon, or wh, kosalte, or wh.
But it's a consolation, and I'm sorry you're so upset.
I'm going to put my hand on my shoulder and I'm going to put my hand on my shoulder and I'm going to put my hand on my shoulder and I'm going to put my hand on my shoulder and I'm going to put my hand on my shoulder and I'm going to put my hand on my shoulder and I'm going to put my hand on my shoulder and I'm going to put my hand on my shoulder and I'm going to put my hand on my shoulder.
The man is also a man of many talents.
or bay yo de chivi de a
or bay chivi
Katè y ap vèsik is the name of the game.
There are three types of people.
There are two main reasons for this.
You've got to know what you're talking about.
There's a lot more to it than that.
That's because more creole is a man's best friend.
I don't know what to do now.
I'm not wearing a bra.
Or wear a bra or a bra.
The men are still there.
The king relé molle, or pay or you can phone you, phone you, or you can't pay.
I'm sure you'll be fine with it.
It's a lot of people's lives.
I threw it away.
rijanm rele l.
Mom, don't worry about your bags, your bags and your bags, your bags and your bags, your bags and your bags.
If you don't know what's going on, you don't know what's going on, you don't know what's going on.
They don't have the money, they don't have the money, they don't have the money, they don't have the money, they don't have the money, they don't have the money, they don't have the money.
We've been fighting for two decades.
What do you think of these men and women, what do you think of them?
What is the sweetest thing about you that takes everything away from you, what is the sweetest thing about you that takes everything away from you?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
They're going to call me and they're going to call me, they're going to call me, they're going to call me, they're going to call me, they're going to call me, they're going to call me, they're going to call me, they're going to call me, they're going to call me, they're going to call me, they're going to call me, they're going to call me, they're going to call me, they're going to call me, they're going to call
When I'm born in this world, I'm going to be fine.
I can start when I'm old, when I'm old, when I'm old, when I'm old, when I'm old, when I'm old, when I'm old, when I'm old, when I'm old, when I'm old, when I'm old, when I'm old, when I'm old, when I'm old, when I'm old, when I'm old, when I'm old, when I'm old, when I'm old, when I'm old, when I'
The wine is cooked.
Are you the one who wants to kill me?
If that's not the case, what do you want from me?
If you don't know who you are, if you don't know who you are, if you don't know who you are, if you don't know who you are.
Where can I get the silver lining?
Silva t pou.
Where is the cell missing?
Don't miss out on getting them back together.
They have not yet been able to get their hands on the device, and they have not yet been able to get their hands on the device.
They're not going to be able to do it.
Li pa pa pa drwa si Men ki janm releases that make you a Siwo kont nou Siwo kont nou pa releases that make you Nan
These are the words of Man.
Siwon is a man who has long since lost his sight and is no longer alive.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to keep up with the pace.
I'm going to re-read you.
The men are now making a new man.
Now you know what to do about it.
and gen le Siwon tou
Isi Siwon Si wosikouj is born in chouga
This is a great man.
There is no such thing as a great man.
Gran mounen isit?
No, if it's your fault, don't you know it's your fault?
There is no such thing as a single person.
If you're a man, you're a man.
If you want to know Tjoka nou know
Some people don't know.
Do you want people to talk to each other, or do you want them to fight each other?
Who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, who are We, and who are We, who are We, and who are We,
If you're going to be with us, you're going to be with us, everyone who knows you is going to be with you.
Men, how are you?
A, a, sansan, nou pa ken women yon ladan.
A, sibot kon peze mwen yo and in it.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
It's just that you don't know what to do with it if you don't want to do it.
Byat si yo w can make coffee.
You're going to have to make a big molecule of chou wga.
It's the first time I've ever had my teeth removed.
Do you know how to use a mold or a long one?
There is no long way to go in this country.
Everyone knows about the past.
Jouske since then.
We have the right to know each other's lives.
or meton yon manch including l epi
O chita sou ouj epi or chita sou ouj epi or chita sou ouj epi or chita sou ouj epi or chita sou ouj epi or chita sou ouj epi or chita sou ouj epi or chita sou ouj epi or chita sou ouj epi or chita sou ouj epi or chita sou ouj epi or chita sou ouj epi or chita sou ouj epi or chita sou ouj epi or chita sou ouj epi or chita sou ouj epi or chita sou ouj epi or chita sou ouj epi
One or two people may also serve in the same capacity.
Why, or new wine, can I make a new one?
No, or met pa medzò or an, a rele tok tok kanl, tok tok kanl, oufou.
I know I'm going to be in trouble, I know I'm going to be in trouble.
If it's too late, it's too late.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
I'm going to put everything on the table.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
After fin gouye nan chouj
Put it on the table.
It's cold.
You're a bottle, you're a musician, you're a man, you're a man!
Kiss and do not kiss again, my grandfather?
Li Granpil, I know you won't be working again for a few hours.
I'm going to give it to the people who do it.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I don't know what I'm going to do.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to make it to the other side of the world.
We're all going to have to deal with it.
The men are now in their midst.
If you believe me, you will believe me.
I'm going to the men's room.
I don't know any men.
I've always wanted to win for someone else.
I've known him ever since.
I can't do that.
Kousra is also present.
Most people don't know me because I don't want to help them.
Since then, I've been working with people.
I don't want to do that anymore.
I don't know if I'm going to be successful.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
Alan is not going to do it.
I am the grandmother of those who died.
It's because I'm a grandmother.
I don't know how to swim in the pool.
They know how to make salt grapes.
If we, therefore, are not happy, many of us are not happy.
And if you know how to do something else, if you know how to do it, or if you know how to do it.
I don't know what to do and I don't know what to do.
There are three of them.
No, there is no such thing as a great man, but there is no such thing as a great man.
Therefore, I urge you not to interfere with yourself, with others, and with others.
What do you want to do with your life?
What's the matter with you, huh?
Yo pa konwon changj yo konn ba wou
Or wè enmen we
I'm going to give you two medals.
What is the remedy?
If you want to do something or know Bou bon pou grit
I can't put my finger on it.
I'm not sure if this is a good idea.
Chany fèy blat
Li gen langichad
They're just going to be there.
How do you relieve yourself, geny langichat, but how do you do that?
It's either hot or cold, or it's cold, or it's cold, or it's cold, or it's cold, or it's cold, or it's cold, or it's cold, or it's cold, or it's cold, or it's cold, or it's cold, or it's cold, or it's cold, or it's cold, or it's cold, or it's cold, or it's cold, or it's cold, or it's cold, or it's
Are there any others you know about, don't you?
No, I won't.
Wa, no, we, we, we won, we plou di, we, we, we, we won.
If you don't like people, you don't want to take advantage of them.
So it's like men, but it's like carbon.
If you don't want to lose, if you don't want to lose, if you don't want to lose, if you don't want to lose, if you don't want to lose, if you don't want to lose, if you don't want to lose, if you don't want to lose, if you don't want to lose, if you don't want to lose, if you don't want to lose, if you don't want to lose, if you don't want to lose, if you don't want to lose,
peoplepap rete fè tout gounon
There are five different ways to get to know each other.
Panze se yon bay wap fata Afri
It's not just me.
For those of you who are alone, when you are with your brother or sister, go to the other side of the world where you can find yourself all over the place, or we can.
Bon anp, I've known you since I saw you chwap now may, one win and one kick.
Do you want to know how to win, or, you know, how to win?
You know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
There's now a whole new plan, one bad one, one bad one, and one bad one.
Is there a way to get rid of rats?
I gen rat kay la pa?
Ratt ki ye, ratt kay la se li hoti al even promene in the outside.
If you want to hear it, try it again.
Am I the only one who can help you?
It's the only one left.
An animal that flies, which flies in the opposite direction to a bird, is called a bird in the opposite direction.
The men stood in front of the figouv.
It's the same with us.
They're in an orderly fashion.
So the animal and now your wit is the way to run.
But now you're on your own.
Bet ki now is a swedish.
I don't know who you are.
We have a chat with Kay.
And we have a chat with Kay.
chat kay la y tou dou
It's not a good chat.
Don't let them get away with it.
Mous cell chat is the same as that of Makou Mwen and Kouwi
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
I'm going to call myself Mimi.
Emanman chat if you are a renlene, why not pit?
Even if the chat is not ready, it can be used as a chat room.
The mother chat with the mother and the mother chat with the mother.
She had two children.
I can't wait to see it.
It's not an animal.
Branakou E sa k drape woup
Manmwen called his mother.
They don't have to pay their bills or pay their bills, so they can pay their bills.
This is the kind of animal that can run a race.
You can't use all of them.
I want to win and live in a loyle bra with all the animals.
It's like living in a Loyle Beatty race.
Betty Kay is a great-granddaughter.
My mother's mother is very happy with me.
The colour of the chat made me cry.
Li renlè marakou
This is the dischat.
I'm going to get rid of the clinic and do it again.
I'm going to tell you a story.
They took me out of here.
"Lord, what do you want me to do?"
There is no one who can fill me up.
I can't wait to see what happens next.
And then there's the ap.
The good news is that it's not a bad thing.
Yes, I'm going back to the drawing board.
I'm going to tell you about my life.
It's a good way to go.
Well, that's what I'm talking about right now, isn't it?
It's like, what, what, what, what, what.
Edwèt, how was I born?
The law is made as, li force anenke, anenke, beast la, anenke jaze.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
Ijon, it's going to take you two to the next level.
Wi, li tout pa m, li konm pou l, li tout color.
If you know how to make music, you can play it.
That's what we're all about.
I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know,
I've won the world, I've won the world, I've won the world, I've won the world, I've won the world, I've won the world, I've won the world, I've lost the world, I've lost the world, I've lost the world, I've lost the world, I've lost the world, I've lost the world, I've lost the world, I've lost the world, I've lost the world, I've lost the world, I've lost the world,
It's all great.
You have everything you need to know.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to keep up with my grandparents.
If you're going to be a beast or a beast, you're going to be a beast.
I don't have any connections.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Anne or se panche
Or they're going to have to panch.
I've learned the craft of knowledge.
I don't know what to do about it.
It's the only thing I know.
Because I know now that I know it all in two different ways.
It's the only way to get rid of it, and it's the only way to get rid of it.
Bo we, li li ap, li li li li and Kolobouy agan men m color.
How are they?
Won gane, the power of the creature li, won gane, yon gane yon gès semen men have a kolobouy.
It's not my fault.
I'm not going to be able to do this anymore.
It's all in your head.
It's about what you're doing.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it to the next level.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it to the end of the month.
It's a man's dream to fly a plane.
However, during the season, there is a lot more to it than that.
Wherever I am, wherever I am, wherever I am, wherever I am, wherever I am, wherever I am.
Jakou is the same
They're also very active.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
I don't know, brother.
Is there a bunch of them?
But I'm not going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to go, I'm going, I'm going, I'm going, I'm going, I'm going, I'm going, I'm
And you know how to read a prayer when you're eating Ramiye
Ramiya is the only one who can help you.
Until you know I don't know.
And then there's the whole thing, and then there's the whole thing, and then there's the whole thing, and then there's the whole thing, and then there's the whole thing, and then there's the whole thing, and then there's the whole thing, and then there's the whole thing, and then there's the whole thing, and then there's the whole thing, and then there's the whole thing, and then there's the whole thing, and then there's the whole thing.
And how are you going to do that?
What do you think?
Ezotolan, bonn zotolan to, zantolon, i hear, men, m can know you lajim.
You know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
It's not, it's not, it's not, it's not.
Men, do you think you're the only one who's going to die?
No, a cow's milk?
Hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
Everything you say about the man who doesn't want to be killed.
I'm also a bit of a bully.
Yo gen de frize
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it myself or not.
I know my teeth.
It's a bit of a blast from the past.
Two enwans and two cones.
Hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
and as Kounna
I don't know if I'm going to be able to get my code in the app, but I'm going to be able to get my code in the app as well.
The code can be cleaned and soaked in water.
Men don't want to write code.
No, it's not about the code.
Do you want to kill animals for water?
For the sake of water, I can't.
I don't know.
No, men can do it.
I don't know what to do.
The two genes are derived from their genes.
It's about what you've learned.
I don't know.
There are two types of reyounies.
You're both crazy.
You know I'm a drunk.
I'm not going to help you.
I don't know everything, everything I know, and I don't care.
Beasts know how to run, don't they, why don't they?
I'm going to have to clean up the mess.
I have a son.
I have a problem.
As a madman, show me that you're an eunuch.
Toutan l'ap changye ekoule.
I know how to make a crown.
Kron Krapo Eti Piti Bèt is also known as Re in Water Gounouch
The tooth is pale.
My teeth are pale.
Or, o, yo pale de, an m tooth.
You are an animal that knows how to do this, yes, they are, they are.
It's now time to move on.
In this way, they are able to fold, fold, and fold.
Or eat the rapper.
It's good to be alive.
They're going to be re-elected.
They don't want to be relegated.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
It's a lot of fun.
They are equal in size.
Imeri is known to be one of the most powerful people in the world.
You're going to have to know how to do it.
I've always wanted to do this.
What is the genesis of the bottle of wine?
I'm also very proud of you.
We've got a lot of work to do.
We're going to have a lot of fun with it.
You are an animal that knows what it is like to live in the wild.
Cankou yon leaf is not a genus of large fungi.
I've always wanted to do this.
Pinèj, Wilen, li gwo wi, kankou li, great sej sa my house sa konsan to ve, li gen pye non m.
The bottom line is to forget how to do it.
You don't know what fossil fuels are.
You've got to know how long it takes to get to the top.
Do you know how to make a good choice, do you know who you are, or do you know who you are?
It's only now that the record is broken.
Now they know the record.
I don't know what I'm going to do now.
I don't have anything to say.
It's the best thing to do.
Y ap chante tout mit lan
Since April I've started to fall into the wrong direction.
They go into everything.
I know what I'm going through and I know everything about you.
The electricity is generated by electricity.
or crying out loud.
I have a connection to it.
I'm sure you've got it all figured out.
Batitou li mi lang tou was born.
It's not that we don't know anything.
There are two generations of children all over the world.
I'm not sure what the consulate's point of view is.
I've always been a big fan of your stuff.
You're a man of the people.
I know I can be a console for someone.
It can also be used in the manufacturing process.
They knew what they wanted to do.
If I don't forget, the past two days of my life, they've got me on the line, they've got me on the line, they've got me on the line, they've got me on the line, they've got me on the line, they've got me on the line, they've got me on the line, they've got me on the line, they've got me on the line, they've got me on the line, they've got me on the line, they've got me on the line, they've
I know what it's like.
Yo konn bèl tout color jwon
I don't know what you know.
I know what you're talking about.
I don't know where I'm going.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
I don't know where I'm going with it.
I know what I'm talking about or I know what I'm talking about.
I'm going to tell you a story.
Yo gen woz
Yo gen mekalite
Yo gen mevan.
Y gen blan
and gen mat blen
It comes in three colors.
Gen conbe color  epi
and mat blen.
Or any other animal, you know, how can I get to the other side of the moon?
I've got other animals that I'm not familiar with.
After that, pass on what's left of it, and don't be afraid of the beast.
Tofè konn volan lè bay sa yo
Get in the car after a malfunction.
I'm not sure what to do with it.
It's just that I don't know what to do with myself.
Jenmi is the only one who can tell me.
There is no doubt that this is the case.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
There is no end in sight.
There are others who have won.
Again, if you know how to make money, don't say a word.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to walk.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to make it until May.
May people on your bra
You may or may not be the person you are now.
Bra yo now me
Today is the 11th day of the year.
I'm going to tell you something about the Estonians.
Today it is a palette.
I'm going to talk to you too.
I'm going to start with you.
Is there any confusion about whether or not I'm safe, safe, safe, safe, safe, safe, safe, safe, safe?
And then there's your problem.
Hey, doll, who's there, who's there, who's there, who's there, who's there, who's there, who's there, who's there, who's there, who's there, who's there, who's there, who's there, who's there, who's there, who's there, who's there, who's there, who's there, who's there?
People are free.
Baby, why do you think I'm going to cut you down and throw you back?
If you're a free man, if you're a free man, you're a free man.
Well, in order to keep you from making a big branch and not to make you, keep your head down.
Well, Branch, how can I keep up with what's going on?
Well, as if it were a big bay to keep the trees, big, big bay t ek.
I'm in the middle of it all.
The problem is that we don't know how to fix it.
There is no such thing as an ecosystem.
I don't want to use it for breakfast or breakfast.
What are they?
The count of Lake Li
I'm going to do other things for you.
It is also possible to use it in a number of ways.
It's not like I'm going to be able to make a living off of it.
Ispon pa l yon short for m
One of the reasons for this is that there is no water.
I've been waiting a month for you.
and dancing amongst them.
I've been waiting for you to come up with something.
We don't know if we're going to make it.
Well, gen baray m to gen lip, gen pi as gen gen lip, gen rede lip sa.
If you don't mind, I will.
They write letters, they write letters, they write letters and they sign them.
Can you make a good coconut leaf, or retye all your branches, or retye in the middle, or a red in the middle?
Well, as far as I'm concerned, you know what I'm talking about now.
There's something else to be said about your soul.
Men are like a leaf.
The men who did not say a
It's the end of a meal.
When I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying, I'm crying
Well, it's all about what's good for people right now.
I'll be back, please.
Well, if you're going to do that, will you be happy with it?
It's all about getting back to the drawing board, Grenn Zawouka.
You're going to have to wait until you're done.
Or you can find the key to the left.
I can't stop myself from grinning.
The grenn gen redèy.
Jan yo pouse a
It's a win-win situation.
Kok o bay
Youse pouse so tou li
One of them is pouse.
Don't get me wrong.
GR ap Kneep la, Kneep la can se grapp.
Well, if the tree is grenn to plant a lantern, how will the tree be?
Wi, grandmother Zabouka, how do you call yourself?
It's just like Zabouka and it's not as good as it should be, so I'm putting on my grenn my big yon rebe yo
As si woun nou yo bay yo e gen Zabouka
Put the big grenn in the new bay and the bay as you go.
Other trees or having to plant a grain.
and how they will plant such a tree.
Papè te creole men woblije, will plant me grèn also.
It's the same as if you're dead, dead, dead, or alive.
I'm not going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you
I'm not going to make the plaque for Chadè Gewòte.
The man was happy with it.
As if I needed to give you a bigger Chadè for me to do it for you.
I'm going to put another collar on it.
I'm going to put some cola with you.
Tell me you know how to do it.
As long as I can do that, I'll be able to do better.
The men were given rations.
I know I'm going to do it for you, and I know I'm going to do it for you.
I know what I can do if I take on the branch of the danmi and I put on the lot and I know what I can do if I take on the tissues of the li.
Onti branch is more than enough to get you out.
I'd like to know more about the market in my branch or the wine I'd give to the men I'd like to give to them.
Or do you know about the graph?
Or from the graph, yo graph lan.
I can try this, I can try the other hand to do the same with you.
Are you saying that you're going to do it again?
How can I do this?
No, I'm not here.
I'm not saying no.
I'm going to tell you about the other lambs and lambs, man, what's the matter?
A, with other legs w, the graffiti can be used to make other ladone in my legs.
Well, do you know what you're getting yourself into so you know what you're getting yourself into?
What is the secretary of state's office doing?
Manjou, please forgive me.
So what's the point of doing that?
There's a lot of other things you can do to take Wilyan.
I've been through a lot in my life.
I'll do it again and again.
There are two kinds of people.
How do you know when to take a branch?
I planted it in my garden.
I'll give you the answer again.
I don't know what it is.
How do you feel about it?
O prate l
plant or l plant
I'll always be there for you, and I'll always be there for you.
There are two types of men in this situation.
I'm trying to figure out what I'm going to do next.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
As a branch of the family, it is a branch of the family Li
It's like the footsteps.
Li is going to take other branches and then move on to other branches.
I'm not going to be able to do it again.
Get up, get up and do something else.
Wi, gen releases sa.
Kounm lòt pran t or yon yè sa Makòt
Your teeth are good.
As a student, why do you want your students to be able to listen to you?
I'm appalled.
What have I done to you?
Li grennen leafy l.
Are you grenning your grass?
I'm going to write a book about you.
What's the matter with you?
Li van te fèy la.
Do you want to know what's going on in Friyère ap kale?
It's free of charge and free of charge.
cankou la w ap pale
De Eba yo  de Eba yo
It's as good as it gets.
I know what you're talking about.
It's not like I'm the only one who knows who you are.
I'm not the only one who's been there.
M ap di Bèt la now may a..
Mommy, what would you do if you were my mommy?
O p kale Mai a.
Anp twiyel, anp twiyel, if you may or may not be able to do it in another way?
Bou de fi e yon, yon zòren, sw ap di is an animal to take.
For example, if you're looking for an animal, you'll need to take it with you.
Bet lagas pye l
Congratulations now.
I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I,
as if or as if gen gen gen bsezon la
It is as if he were a child because he is a child of God.
Conf is a type of confectionery made from a single piece of wood.
It's so full of free will.
It's the only thing that makes you feel good about yourself.
Or as they cover them up.
They are covered with zèvans or wells or two if you like or a few.
And, uh, they're full of you.
Once again, they were charged with Eliv Bel.
If you want to see the fwon epoch or everyone in your home and in your family's family.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
I'm sure you've seen a lot of them.
What's the point of winning?
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it all the way through.
We are free to do what is right for us.
It's not working.
Hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
One thing that I'm sure you'll get used to is when you're ready to go.
I'll tell you what, I'll tell you what?
You are a great person.
What are you going to take with you again?
Who knows if I'm going to be an ambassador, who knows if I'm going to make a convoy?
What's up with the soup?
Are you riding a pig?
And the ap romase l?
What's new and what's new?
Y ap tirè mango an, mwen, mwen granpil mango isi, mwen granpil piye, kile yon mango bon pour maintenant, lè lmi, bon Elle!
On who's going to start pou wi
I'm not sure I can do that.
That's when I started writing.
That's how you get started.
I'm going to tell you all about it.
We're just beginning to get to know each other.
There are too many chances.
It's from Leopri twonmur
Ankali yo di Vi Mitropa.
Epi, Gwon an ba yon again as a silo, OK yon mango, li poko bien m, ki gwo ki ki lan bouch yo?
Kokkou renve a bouch kwonn tou nou pa a bon toujou
What do you call it?
I'm here to help.
There's a lot of bananas, but what's the point?
Here we are.
It's a lot of fun, isn't it?
I've never been able to find it.
Se yon rebev.
Flè, from where, from where, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what, from what,
Well, it's the coast, you know, yeah, my animals are the ones, the ones, where's your sheep?
If you know how to use a hand covering for someone new to buy and use a hand covering for someone new to buy and use a hand covering for someone new to buy and use a hand covering for someone new to buy and use a hand covering for someone new to buy and use a hand covering for someone new to buy and use a hand covering for someone new to buy and use a hand covering for someone new to buy and use a hand covering for someone new to buy and use a hand covering for someone else.
You can't cover your face with a piece of cloth or a piece of cloth in your hand.
They have a network of loops.
How do you know what I'm going to do with it?
Menat, with Bannann.
I've been looking for you for so long, and now I'm all about Bannann.
I'm sorry Rache, but I'll give it to you like this.
Coupe l Rache I saw in front of l.
What is the meaning of the word "new"?
And what else can we do about it, right?
A piece of fig, a piece of beef, a piece of beef, a piece of beef, a piece of beef, a piece of beef, a piece of beef, a piece of beef.
I don't know if I can make figmi douf.
Even so, there is no such thing as a free lunch.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
He is about to kill her.
If you're a member, what's wrong with you, what's wrong with you?
Not exactly.
Bannan m, you are perfect.
Well, he or she is a genie, a code y together, a code y together, a code y together, a code y together, a code y together, a code y together, a code y together, a code y together, a code y together, a code y together, a code y together, a code y together, a code y together, a code y together, a code y together, a code y together, a code y together, a code y together, a code y together, a code y together, a code y together.
I'm not going to put it together.
I'm here, I'm here for you.
The goddess is born together.
Masa, yon, masa.
Bon, where's Bonnen, where's the rest of you?
Yeah, who keeps everything else, who keeps revye b?
Well, are you ready for a treat?
Nat yo fa with li.
As if you're on the lookout for something.
Yon libe m, flè koukore, kizan yo yo is yon, yo make a graph.
Is there another one for me again?
There's no such thing as cocoa.
What do you do with a ponytail?
I'm not going to say thank you very much.
Yo kannen m, ouyi, pa konn konn konn thing with li.
I'm going to burn, I'm going to burn, I'm going to burn, I'm going to burn, I'm going to burn, I'm going to burn, I'm going to burn, I'm going to burn, I'm going to burn, I'm going to burn, I'm going to burn, I'm going to burn, I'm going to burn, I'm going to burn, I'm going to burn, I'm going to burn, I'm going to burn, I'm going to burn,
In the case of Ograje, if you have a coconut, or you have to pull the trigger.
Pay, if you don't want to pay, pay for it.
Pay the cocoa, chakam ten tan dis or an, pay the cocoa.
What do you know about creation?
When I retire, do I get paid, or do I lose my job?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
Yo kokoja gen yon leaf coconut a
I'm a big fan of this.
There is no one to blame for this.
It's one of those things you don't know.
It's like you're having such a party.
This is part of a graph.
There is a party.
I know how to do a ballet with a graph.
I'm going to kill you.
I'm going to kill you too.
Conzi and conmyen stable kouko yon gen to make sure you know what to do about it.
I'm a very young person.
In a few minutes, they'll be able to make a move or two.
They're the only ones who have children of their own.
Why should I have a title?
And then, when they start to reckon with it, they've got men on their knees, and they're ready to move on.
In the meantime, we're going to have to pay attention to it.
Bonkò kouk or gen gwo tout an an leaf la
yon ak ye o gen de li
Eske koukouye y ap gen tach
Like I said before.
And then there's the creation and the creation of something to inform people about.
I'm sure you'll be able to see it this way.
Kizanm releases the party as a
Lanm, what's up?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
How do you know if it's cocoa?
As much as I can remember, it's my grandmother.
How do you know what to do with your hair?
Yo is now koukouyi.
I'm going to make two other bays and I'm going to love the koukouyi.
It's not like I'm going to be able to keep up with what I'm going to do.
Yo made oil and koukouyi.
I'm going to make some sweet and coconut-based tablets.
Good tablets are a group of do you know how to do a do you know how to do a do you know how to do a do you know how to do a do you know how to do a do you know how to do a do you know how to do a do you know how to do a do you know how to do a do you know how to do a do you know how to do a do you know how to do a do you know how to do a do you know how to do it.
I'm not going to say anything.
Hey, what's the other thing you're doing here?
Yo bonn covers kay with li, yo yo covers kay with coconut flour.
I don't want anyone to put on something that makes you feel bad.
I don't know how to fix things.
I can't wait to get up there.
This is how I came to Zion.
There are two ways to do this.
I put on my stuff.
I'm going to meet someone who's new to me.
You're going to have to do something about it, and you're going to have to do something about it, and you're going to have to do something about it, and you're going to have to do something about it, and you're going to have to do something about it, and you're going to have to do something about it, and you're going to have to do something about it, and you're going to have to do something about it, and you're going to have to do something about it.
If you want to make an appearance, you have to do something special.
What do you think of the winners or losers?
Or any of them?
Yo, what kind of coconut is that?
When it comes to your life, when it comes to your life, how do you know?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
How can I run even when I'm on my way up?
Go ahead, go ahead, go ahead, go ahead, go ahead, go ahead, go ahead, go ahead, go ahead, go ahead, go ahead, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go, go
Vwigankou a risa yon fè yè jou, on the poor and woukons of his chadèk, right?
And for the money, what are you doing?
One make the grep Zoranj, one make the isi, one make the two.
Well, I'll give you another one of my favourites.
Even though they're small, they're small, but they know real things, especially when they're small.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
Once again, such as using silicone to wash the radishes for a sitwon an, or a sewonnavi, sa li an ri ri l.
It's the devil.
E greek kankou or gen yon lòt bay akhipi great kè chadèk
I don't have any problem with water as much as I do.
There's a lot of people out there.
Gen releases l.
Oh, whoever has a cake or two, even if the cake is too thick and too much, has a cake or two.
Either way, in a version, if you're not, am I the boss?
I'm not sure what to do.
So, uh, what's the big deal?
Do you know of any other people who would like to know about it?
You sit down, you sit down, you confess your guilt.
Africa I also know before.
If you're not sure what you're looking for.
Yes, it's a good idea, but it's not a big deal.
I'm going to make a big move.
The good news is that I'm not the only one who knows where to go.
I'm not a fan.
Nanbo Kanf, what is Kanf?
I know that.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to keep up with what's going on.
I know how to make a ton of noise with you.
I know how to make a tonm tonm with t rebe
I've always known L..
Bannen, you are reserved, you are reserved.
Oh, he did this, la m veritablement wouz.
Wow, they are genie.
What's the pitch?
I'm in the bay and I'm in the bay.
So, what's the big deal about it?
I'm going to tell you the truth, and I'm going to tell you the truth.
Donnen is truly a woman.
I'm not a native Estonian.
I am 11 years old.
One of the men to whom the truth is addressed.
a gen release.
Pye really does.
Is it true?
Well, it's not the same, it's the same.
Li relieved me.
Yo e lanm veritably, the same lanm.
Good baby and tell me all the time what to do with it.
All members of the association are welcome.
Gon Gon lòt anpò
If he knows what he's doing, he knows what he's doing.
It is known to be a source of tension for people in Malaysia.
Repeat the process again.
He knows who he is and he knows who he is.
Where do I go from here?
They're not going to be able to keep up with what's going on, but they're going to keep up with what's going on, and they're going to keep up with what's going on, and they're going to keep up with what's going on, and they're going to keep up with what's going on, and they're going to keep up with what's going on, and they're going to keep up with what's going on.
Gwon, rebay or ren is the same as jan and may may may be many, livèt, gen gwo rhen.
Boun konn ti bagaye
I can't help but wonder.
I don't know.
Release the name of the genus.
As you can see, it's cold.
It's free.
I'm the only one who knows.
It's good to know that Pye Quebec is using a kachiman.
One of the most important things to do is to make sure that you're comfortable with it.
Moncel kayite is not enough.
If you want to win, you have to go to: Gwan Akri
I'd like to get back to the drawing board.
or other bay nou kounn now a.
Kasab, well, m bay kiblen, man kounn now yo, i do, but i want to pay.
Kowosal, an, wi kowosal.
Or, are you or are you here?
The men of Madan Esiniyè
I know that there is no love and that there is no love and that there is no love and that there is no love and that there is no love and that there is no love and that there is no love and that there is no love and that there is no love and that there is no love and that there is no love and that there is no love and that there is no love and that there is no love and that there is no love and that there is no love and that there is no love and that there is no love and that there is no love.
I have given you the king of grenadia
It's about the genesis.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do anything about it.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
with one of the boys.
You're going to have to grow up.
He is the only man who knows who he is now.
I'm going to tell you a lot about me.
I'm also a human being.
I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean,
I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do.
Is it true, if you are a sinner, that you are a sinner?
What's the matter with you?
Kann, zoraj, pou pom or, pou pom waj, pou kwonnen?
Or gen la, or k ap moutre m?
What is it?
In or out of the way.
I don't know what to do.
It's a bit like that.
reyen san fè reyen san fè reyen san fè reyen san fè reyen san fè reyen san fè reyen san fè reyen san fè reyen san fè reyen san fè reyen san fè reyen san fè reyen reyen san fè reyen san fè reyen reyen san fè reyen san fè reyen reyen san fè reyen reyen san fè reyen reyen san fè reyen reyen san fè reyen reyen reyen san fè reyen reyen re
Or look at it too.
It's the first time I've seen it.
I know what you're doing.
When you try to say a word, you're not going to say a word.
Don't make a fuss about it.
There is a plethora of l.
Ravitya and Sa, Mosa.
Well, that's a cons.
It's the same thing with gadriyaj, gadriyaj.
Or look at the beast.
lip or lipstick.
Or take a break.
Mès aprèmi di nou lajon ni ou ball now
I'm going to be busy again.
Now is the time for the ball.
It's as if you're using the Bét ou gene.
Or not put your soul in a yon fech
I don't know what I'm going to do with my life.
Or not put your soul in it.
It's my mother's side of the family.
Or put on your mother's hand.
No, listen to you people too.
With so many animals, sitting all together, the central dish is something more.
Pak, pak, yon rele la, yon konn rele la, at, yon koray, or van konn, or van konn.
Well, e, beast, as an animal, man man too.
If there are so many animals, who knows what to do next?
How can you say that, Ether?
Can you tell me if you're going to be able to use your phone in Bethesda and put it on the doorstep of Bethesda?
What's your name?
Gon e on bet of m pa wayisi an men
Li mache koudyen kouden kouden as wayis faire yo pa gade l.
No, it's not a choice, but it's a choice.
Bòpichay, Bòrik, let me sit with you.
Well, if it's like riding a horse, but they're running, how do you know what that means?
Well, how about a cup of tea?
I've got a lot of beef.
The good news is that you're going to get a lot of money by putting more money on people's phones.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it to L..
Good other li portrait mouton an
They're going to have a vision.
I don't know what to say.
Now you know how to reboot a bwen nan nou
What's the point of being an angel?
Well, hey, I take your Bèt, I know what to do and get out of Ka a Bèt, I call Bèt, and Bèt sa.
I told you, if you take off your closet, they'll call you back.
Kanske ton pa Isè is a tea sa
about who will do the job.
Perhaps there are two types of convergence.
They're making a lot of noise.
They call it the best of them.
Are they still alive?
Wi, I'm the Beef Chawa, the Beef Chawa.
Wi, Chawa or beer I beef Chawa?
Are you ready for this?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
If you want to see something that exists, but you want to see it, it doesn't matter.
I know I'm going to make it up to you.
I know where you are, I know where you are, I know what you're doing, I know where you're going, I know where you're going, I know where you're going, I know where you're going, I know where you're going, I know where you're going, I know where you're going, I know where you're going, I know where you're going, I know where you're going, I know where you're going, I know where you're going.
Gen lan zone yo thin dari, yo moun up, yo rele yo bef sile, yo rele yo bef sile, yo rele yo bef sile.
Now I know how to take it easy and I'm ready to go back to the drawing board.
What's new is what's new.
Are you ready to release me?
How do they even blach first.
If you have a plank, if you have a plank, why do you want it?
Koch or balye.
Kouch yon planch, you know.
I've been around for a long time.
What kind of animals are these?
I'm not going to lie.
I don't know about you.
That's right.
If I confess, I will send them to us.
I'm going to confess.
Is it hard to get a goulè or what's next?
I'm still very much in love with you.
Now men know how to make a living off of it.
Well, they're going to be grandmothers again.
Well, the count I set for Beef now costs you now you know, what's the race?
Is it a race against the clock?
He sold them to Ray.
I'm going to sell them to Ray.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
Well, let's take a look at how you win.
I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you something, I'm going to tell you something, I'm going to tell you something, I'm going to tell you something, I'm going to tell you something, I'm going to tell you something, I'm going to tell you something, I'm going to tell you something, I'm going to tell you something, I'm going to tell you something, I'm going to tell you something, I'm going to tell you something, I'm going to tell you something.
Oukloti l, or what?
Kloti, do you care or do you care?
Oukloti, or do it with your hands, or do it with your hands, or do it with your hands, or do it with your hands, or with your hands, or with your hands, or with your hands, or with your hands, or with your hands, or with your hands, or with your hands, or with your hands, or with your hands, or with your hands, or with your hands, or with your hands, or with your hands, or with your hands, or with your hands, or with your hands, or with your hands, or with your hands, or with your
It's not your fault.
The whole thing is new.
One of my friends and I'm going to do everything I can to call him Klaouti.
I can't wait to get back to you.
or pa ke l.
O, or closed paralance, beast, or let you out so that you can do it or live it?
Or do I charge, or do I leave you outside, or do I leave all the coal in the savannah, or do I leave you?
Or leave me in the savannah.
Or maybe I'll see you in freedom.
Or I'll see you in freedom .
Well, if you're going to be a buyer, you're going to be a buyer, you're going to be a buyer, you're going to be a buyer, you're going to be a buyer, you're going to be a buyer, you're going to be a buyer, you're going to be a buyer, you're going to be a buyer, you're going to be a buyer, you're going to be a buyer, you're going to be a buyer, you're
OU pa rele yo fouray, or rele yo fouray, or rele yo change the animal to four now.
It can be used for seeds, seeds, grass for livestock, grain or lambs.
Is it now or am I going to take a few more?
Is it possible to win or not to win?
Li pou kochou, li pou kabri, mwen lè pou bèf, or wa zèb san di wa se che?
I don't know, now it's time.
Kijan w rele Tata Bèf bèt yo, kakabèf prit.
It's always like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like,
As if they could do so, they could do so.
as if they were two as if they were one.
Or you'll release it.
One of them is releasing it.
It's your fault.
Fimiye, what's your sanfayy yo?
From a male to a female, it's a curse.
It's been a long time since I've been in a van.
It's not like we're not going to be able to keep up with the latest news.
A general who knows what he knows is a general who knows what he knows.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it on a regular basis.
It's the same thing as being a fan.
God's people are young.
It's like a young cow.
What do you think of it?
On to your milk.
Who's going to tell you?
I can buy milk, since I can eat all your animals, whether they're running or running.
The farmer, even though he is younger than the animals.
Koukoum ay ke.
If you have children, or if you have a large animal, where do you live?
Wake up, wake up, wake up, I don't want you even if you're right now, or you're right now.
Men, never think of a man as a man.
People are known as Silèò
You're cutting off your vote.
Or I'll make you say it again.
Do you know how to chat?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
Yo chatre, wi lou.
If it is a kochon chatre, what is it or are you running a kochou chatre?
Re kochon, ki jen or run a chateau kochou, wi.
Yo chon chatre, you know.
Well, what's the matter, what's the matter, what's the matter, what's the matter, what's the matter, what's the matter, what's the matter, what's the matter, what's the matter, what's the matter, what's the matter, what's the matter, what's the matter, what's the matter, what's the matter, what's the matter, what's the matter, what's the matter, what's the matter, what's the matter, what's the
Koure, you little beast, when you're in the theater, are you on your way?
I'm going to talk to you about it.
Let's have a chat about it.
I've seen you pay the bills.
What's your plan?
M al Bèt, m renlè m al, m al.
It's called Femel.
M, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m, m,
Selè l Pachatre, why are you calling them?
Well, there's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
Anelè is an elected official.
I'm going to do something about it.
I'm going to be a victim.
You can't go on a date with someone else.
The pti beast and the fon femel
One big thing is that there's no such thing as a bad man.
A lot of bonzen up there has been badly damaged.
Carly, they are black.
If you're in a relationship, if you don't know who you are, you'll make others.
What's the matter, Vach sa pran poz mal?
I'm going to take it, I'm going to take it, I'm going to take it, I'm going to take it, I'm going to take it, I'm going to take it, I'm going to take it, I'm going to take it, I'm going to take it, I'm going to take it, I'm going to take it, I'm going to take it, I'm going to take it, I'm going to take it, I'm going to take it, I'm going to take
If you are a Vach ki
A woman should be treated as if she were suffering from a mental illness.
It's a bad idea, and I'm going to kill you.
The ligbey is pale.
It's going to be a good one.
I can come from either li or good chen
They make it look like they've got something wrong with you.
I'm going to tell you about it.
E, bon, bon, bon, the beast.
Epi, on you, on you bef, mouvon, you bef.
If you are gay in the savannah, make your way up the road, and you'll be there for me.
I'm happy to be popping up.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
Or find me again, how are you?
Or will they survive?
Pedi, they're lost.
Wap found me again, I ran from the savannah.
They are lost, they are saved.
They're lost, they're lost, they're lost, they're the same thing.
Li sleeps, or you can find me.
Is it a mystery, or is it a vindication?
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
I know what you're talking about.
I slept for a while.
One of the greatest families in the world.
I'm going to release you.
Efren, t ap touk boos land yo yo lang, epi yo gen boos land yo.
What's wrong with you?
No, I'm not going to go into a long bay, for that matter.
There is a lot to be said about man silyen soul from reza yon.
It's going to be a very busy day in April.
They're in the middle of a road trip, and they're on the run.
You know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
It's like a cow and a pig.
Do you want to buy a bottle of wine or a bottle of wine or a bottle of wine?
I'm going to tell you a story, I'm going to tell you a story, I'm going to tell you a story, I'm going to tell you a story, I'm going to tell you a story, I'm going to tell you a story, I'm going to tell you a story, I'm going to tell you a story, I'm going to tell you a story, I'm going to tell you a story, I'm going to tell you a story, I'm going to tell you a story, I'm going to tell
It's just that when I call you, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me, you call me,
Well, yes, monman, yes, bach lan, li ansent.
I'm going to give it a try.
The man who wanted to be God's son did not want to have children.
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to make a sandwich.
It's a real life.
Now that you've taken it, you're going to have to clean it up.
And when it comes to silé, you pit and retangue bouch manwa li, drink milk, what do you do?
I'm going to eat.
The mother and the child may be separated from the mother and the child may be separated from the mother and the child may be separated from the mother and the child may be separated from the mother and the child may be separated from the mother and the child may be separated from the mother and the child may be separated from the mother and the child may be separated from the mother and the child may be separated from the mother and the child may be separated from the mother.
And, of course, when you're a parent or editor, there's nothing wrong with that.
Te, you're not there.
Yes, you can get the milk underneath someone else's milk, and then someone else can get the milk underneath someone else's milk.
What do you think?
Machann yo as pou pap.
Well, since you're doing well, I bet you won't do it again, how do you want to do it again?
Can I write more?
How do you do that, how do you do that?
I'm going to rent it.
Whether you're going to continue, you're going to have to know who you're going to be, and you're going to have to say goodbye.
How do you know what you're getting into?
Bon, mwen bay, yon kon fran anpo, kon si lè ou revenen wès, gen bon lèp, yon namizè l sa a.
It's a piece of cake.
Good, good, good, good, I'm sorry you're going back to your old man.
Bèf, Ejev, Eevach, Ejagavel my soul is turned into mine.
It's hard to know what you're getting yourself into.
The roots of the beast are in your pocket.
There is a lot more to it than that.
The men of all the animals I know are the roots of the animals I know are the roots of the animals I know are the roots of the animals I know are the roots of the animals I know are the roots of the animals I know are the roots of the animals I know are the roots of the animals I know are the roots of the animals I know are the roots of the animals I know are the roots of the animals I know are the roots of the animals I know are the roots of the animals.
There's no way I'm going to make it.
I can't wait to get back to the roots.
And boukoum anladi e Bèt fè yon kon gen ki du li, manladi sa.
Se pou Bèt, or li.
You're going to have to do it all over again.
Colori, do you know who you are, how do you know who you are?
I know what you mean, I know what you mean.
Do you know how to win?
Some of the beef is known as sec.
I've seen a lot of people in the video, and I've seen a lot of people in the video right now.
Now it's time to make a final decision.
I've known them since I was a kid.
As of right now, it's full of shit.
Serve the food and drink.
Kote is now a conductor at the twip la concert.
Panst la, panst la chèch.
Or renlè lan, or moulan.
Or get rid of the moul.
Men, I'm not a French beef.
When I'm inside, my head is on fire, my head is on fire, my head is on fire, my head is on fire, my head is on fire, my head is on fire, my head is on fire, my head is on fire, my head is on fire, my head is on fire, my head is on fire, my head is on fire, my head is on fire, my head is on fire, my head is on fire, my head is on fire, my head is on fire, my head is on fire, my head is on fire, my head is on fire,
Where I win, to win men, win reze, right?
Sa, bouch bef, jòl bef la.
Please sit down, please sit down, please sit down.
Is it cow's milk?
Didn't you ever see me?
What is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it, what is it?
Wi, zonkonm bè, wi, esit la pouf, Palèp, Palèp, wi, kontin la yo wi, Palèp, beef la, and sa a pouf.
It's good to be a practitioner and I'll stand by you.
It's the only thing I've ever seen before.
If only I knew how to call your people?
Bouchè, bouchè, gwi.
Well, here's a guy who's going to kill a chicken and keep it for a while.
They cut the edge of the leaf, the edge of the leaf, cut the edge of the leaf, cut the edge of the leaf, cut the edge of the leaf.
They're cutting back on their lives, they're tweeting, and they're retiring young.
For the sake of clarity.
Or retire to be able to run or run.
I'm going to kill you.
Bonk, a great man like you, a great man like you, a great man like you, a great man like you, a great man like you, a great man like you, a great man like you, a great man like you, a great man like you, a great man like you, a great man like you, a great man like you, a great man like you, a great man like you, a great man like you.
Pat, where I pee, I pee, I pee, I pee, I pee.
I'm going to eat the beef.
What are you going to do with the royal men?
wi, bega l.
Bo, li kote as silè beef la, mwen.
I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am,
Did I tell you?
I also know that the person who takes you will be happy with you.
Trit bef lan, Yon bay zanm bef santye, or benzen yon matye yon bef, are you going to give it to me?
vani mason, bon, di demi, demibief, wi, yon bon di demi, beef.
Well, I'm going to tell you a secret, or I'm going to tell you a secret.
Men preski, onbò, onkare, nou kave beef, esak pi pitiye paskaren onkaren, jion on run, yon liv, yon liv.
Now that it's been a year and a half, I don't want to run.
It's nice to know that you're sick.
Either I'm sick or I'm sick, or I'm sick or I'm sick right now.
It's been a long time coming.
It's a different story.
There are other things that everyone knows about right now that we all know about.
Is he your brother?
Gen Si brother and sister is the only man who knows how to be a man.
Beef la and the beef.
Beef and li is a part of it.
Viyan an pou a beef la
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
I can't think of a reason why I'm here.
The bladder is the bladder of the bladder.
It doesn't have to be silent.
Se, renn pre, bef fangen ren.
I mean, is there anything you don't want to do with me?
There's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
Now, as if I didn't have a chance to win, I'm still here.
Blanch as a sou if i'm in time l
E, bon, gen yon party as fi, bon, people z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z z
Or to count the men I've bought.
Or the part of the beef and veal.
You can't or won't see a movie.
There's no such thing as content.
Men are men, men are men.
Men in my mouth.
Filè, filè vyen men, you too.
It's good to be back now or I'll be back soon.
What happened to the brakes and wheels now?
Is it now or now or is it now or is it coming?
What do I know about you?
It's all right, it's all right.
Or else I'd be so good at it, I'd be so good at it, too.
One of them is a levy.
You're going to release the party as part of a gen zou
They're not going to be able to do it.
It's either now or you're with me.
Yon pati lamm bef
How can I help you?
That's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right.
There are a few exceptions.
Or a fine ball of bi
We're going to be able to get out of here.
I'm going to do something about it.
Or tell me what to do.
Well, m, e, f and if the consonant bears a child, it is called l.
No, when your baby is born, when your baby is born, your mother is born.
Laryè and I are friends.
I can't wait to get my hands on it.
or pa e.
Or a good cochon firm.
or pa chatri l
I'm going to release L..
You are Kochou!
Boy is evil.
Brè l kourè kochou.
Now, savann, you're going to be locked up, you're going to be locked up, you're going to be locked up, you're going to be locked up, you're going to be locked up.
I'm sure you'll be able to find out what you're getting yourself into.
I'm going to go through this again.
What's the point of getting out of the house and getting out of the house?
Have you ever thought about it?
L ap lanbe l.
What's the matter with me?
It's the salt of the earth.
What do you know?
I'm sure you'll be able to put some salt in your pocket.
You can't put on a cell, you can't get rid of a cell, you can't get rid of a cell, you can't get rid of a cell, you can't get rid of a cell, you can't get rid of a cell, you can't get rid of a cell, you can't get rid of a cell, you can't get rid of a cell, you can't get rid of a cell, you can't get rid of a cell, you can't get rid of a cell, you can't get rid of
Bon, e pa kay as fi log m E kabrit, or pavit alan order jade moun or, or pavit li ni run too much.
I'm going to put a load on it, code.
A bout was, we're going to do it, but we're not going to do it, so we're going to do it.
As they contain as we do, do they contain such a thing, my dear?
I know I'm on my way.
I'm on my way.
So now, we're going to have to find a way to get back to where we came from.
When we say we're wrong, we say we're wrong.
Well, and, and.
It is possible to be a leader, a leader of all the others, and a leader of all the others.
It's all the rest of you.
Major in front, major in front of the cabrit.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
Bon e, m al kabit lan syan l rele, Bouk, bon Elè, konm swap ou.
If you want to retire after a certain period of time, then you should be able to pay your debts.
Will I thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank
W kòche l.
I'm sure you'll find a way to get to know yourself.
They've got their heads cut off.
They've got their heads up their asses.
Koumél di la is the name of the game.
What do you want me to do?
Pedevi, Pedevi, you are not the same person as I am in the redemption of gold, what can I do?
Another one of my friends.
the color as t or a.
You can't win from yes
You're going to have to pay attention to what's going on.
The colour is blue.
It's a bit of a shock.
If you want to vide, bring chevou si palen wa m, onnen to hear chvo ou lan.
Who knows if a horse will win?
Yon k gen, vou la pral nwa, mwen.
se, se, m are late.
I've been waiting for you.
whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa
I'm going to tell you what they're going to do.
Ouy wouj Yon gen color of their
Li gen color bwen, people.
Gen color bren.
or to make a horse barren because it is barren.
What's wrong with me?
Could it be that she had no children?
Mou jyen, the horse.
Or do you want to eat it?
Or one pou li, horse.
Even then, I know I'm a demon.
Well, then, Goncheval, are you ready for me, where am I?
I can tell you.
Bon paray again
If you're going to do it with my mail, you know what I'm going to do.
It's either good or bad for you.
I'm going to redeem myself.
They're going to have to come up with something else.
Yo pa gen
I'm going to have my eyes on you.
I'm going to be a human.
Will the pwanj who, yo on di yo will be recounted?
I'm going to have to pay my bills.
Well, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
But is the animal in the boat or is it in the boat?
And you've got it all figured out.
Consirè yo two yo two yo nouchan
It's all about you.
Two pills of honey are in the fowgraf.
Why don't you tell me what to do, and I'll tell you?
Abèy, you don't know how to call myél, Abèy, angèy.
Good and bad things come to you, and I'll let you know.
He gave it to Michael.
You are in a colony.
Yo aride yo Bwat Myèn
Se Bwat la ki tanbou a
It's the only thing I can think of.
Nou opinion de yo lakye
There is no new opinion of me.
I'm not going to lie to you.
It's going to happen soon.
I will retrieve the myel, I can't get the myel out, I will copy the myel, copy the myel, copy the myel, copy the myel, copy the myel.
Well, I'm going to make the film so I can get it out of the closet or in the closet, as you can see.
I can think or see what I can do.
And then I looked at it.
Or you're going to have a grape myel.
For an app you'll put me in a box of soup or stew.
or raise the myel la or raise the myel la
We don't know if there's a grape harvest yet.
epi or wine pande epi
The wine is put in my new epic.
What's the offer?
Hey, how are you?
How do I get out of my own way?
So, what do you think of this book?
I've got a few.
And then you can say, well, you can say, well, you can say.
I can listen to a man and a woman.
How can anyone else know about the affair?
I don't know, I don't know.
What's your mother doing to you?
Liyel a, mother of bees, do you know who you are?
Mwen, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, who
It's the red honey.
So I'm going to take you, so that I can travel with you.
It's not my cup of tea.
What's wrong with you?
I'm going to take care of you and your kids.
It's all in your head.
What do you want to put on a boat or what do you want to do now?
I'm going to put you on the second floor.
I know how to do it as if I were a man.
I'm not sure what you're going to do.
As a matter of fact, you've got something to say.
The things that are white are blasphemous.
All of you all of you wanted to know how to take it.
You've got a lot of fun now.
I've come to my senses.
Vèn rede l.
If you know what I mean, you know what I mean, you know what I mean.
I'm with you on this one.
I've been thinking about it for a while now, but I'm not sure.
One of them is a big brother.
If I'm sitting on the bench every other day, what's the matter with me?
When people die, why do they live?
I'm going to see Tanbou a.
If the other side of the coin, well, it's good to buy a pound, what do you know?
I have children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren.
I'm another one of your lovers, let's face it, I'm a fan.
How do you make a type that is the type that you want to buy in your store?
To me, it's my cup of tea, and I'm going to buy it, it's my cup of tea, and I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
Dr. Avatit Abè and I are not working and we are working on our own.
I know that you can do your job on a stigo Whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa
I'm here for you.
It is possible to have all the milk and milk together with it.
together.
Together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together, together.
They're together, but they're not together.
Yo jou bonkou
I'm going to tell you how to drive.
It's easy to feel like you're being bullied by a demon.
I don't know what to do with myself.
It's the quietest way to go.
words and sayings.
I remember the words.
It's just a word or two.
Or two decades.
Or once a pe or di yo wa
I'm all yours to remember.
I'm looking at you, and I'm going to tell you a few things, and I'm going to tell you a few things.
Start from here, and then you're done.
And it's all in your head.
And you're all right, man, are you?
Gen nonm bay, I'm going to talk to you.
I've always known Ken Bel and his family, and I've always known Tanbou.
It's like a mousse on a sail.
In the end, I'm going to have to make a decision about what I'm going to do.
If anyone is going to eat now, they will make bouji, bouji, ouve.
It can be confirmed with anvil bonj and li vin canlere, li gra, m, li.
It's full of people.
What's the deal?
As long as the party is not full?
So, as a sign of your faith, what can you do for me?
They call me man, but they push me or they come to me, and I'm not going to win.
I don't know what to do with myself.
They know how to make a man.
It's not like you're going to be able to do anything about it.
Pye man, I'm going to kill them.
They know the bay man.
Then, don't ask the men.
If he is a great man, he will ask more questions.
He pours tears in my eyes.
But I'm going to call Pikan, Pikan sotè, jou and Pikan, now or you're going to sue the commissioner.
The people of Akasha, or the people of Akasha, are the descendants of Akasha.
Redit for me an, akasya, bon, bon yes, onf, onm my wish is to leave me, leave me.
I don't know, or I know.
It is a kind of kabri.
Do you know?
It's not like that.
Wa, you know, bay a on l?
Esipta genyè or gwa sol.
Men, do you know me?
E, e, bag and bay to stand still.
This is how Gondin veb kay, This is how gen zèb kay.
In the meantime, we've got to get back to the drawing board.
It's time for you to win.
zèb braz wa
Make a camp with you.
The beast knows now.
Zèb yagidi voye voye
What are you going to do with it?
I'm going to cover it up with you, how are you, how are you, how are you doing?
Where are you grappò m, Piti, or gen l in my garden, bo gen m verb, verb, or wè verb do?
What is the meaning of the words "Zeb Wouj Gen lisye wè zeeb Wouj"?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
It's a twil to the root cause.
Can you tell me what it is?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
Now, you know what I mean.
It's all about the pentad.
Or do you know?
We didn't know what we were doing.
There's a lot to know about the future.
I'm not a cousin, I'm a cousin, I'm a cousin.
That's why I'm here.
Let's see what they're up to.
There is no such thing as a free lunch, there is no such thing as a free lunch, there is no such thing as a free lunch, there is no such thing as a free lunch, there is no such thing as a free lunch, there is no such thing as a free lunch, there is no such thing as a free lunch, there is no such thing as a free lunch, there is no such thing as a free lunch, there is no such thing as a free lunch, there is no such thing as a free lunch, there is no such thing as a free lunch.
You know what I mean.
That's what I'm talking about.
Bon pa won zègue de zèb ba le?
wi, gen rebe, zèb ba le.
Ekon, renn rei lataniye gwan l, isit pa genye.
Garen cities, but here it is.
I know what I'm looking for, and I'm going to pay for it.
Bon gen, like a drop, like a drop, like a drop, like a drop, like a drop, like a drop, like a Bon Bond, like a relay, like a camel.
I'm on my way.
A gen sa
I'm going to tell you about it.
A gen ak kare jou.
If you don't know who you are, who or what is it?
Well, if there is a farm, there is a lot to do because of the farm, the branches of the family, the goodness.
For the sake of clarity, prat chèl.
The other one knows of the new one, you, menme di Bou and the new one.
But then again, it's a new thing, and it's a new thing.
I'm not a gen, I'm not a gen, I'm not a gen, I'm not a gen, I'm not a gen, I'm not a gen.
Pa gen li.
A generation of one hundred and twenty-five is like red, red and yellow, red, green, red, green, red, green, red, red, red, red, red, red, red, red.
And if there is a man on the other side of the world, what can you say?
M pa konni l.
I don't know who.
It's hard to say who knows.
Your teeth can be used in the same way.
There is also a large chapel of ease.
It's as if I'm back with you.
Now, you three, as you can count on your grandparents, yo mapou, you mapou.
Bondond, there is another big bondond, there is another big bondond, there is another beautiful bondond, there is another bondond, there is another bondond, there is another bondond, there is another bondond, there is another bondond, there is another bondond, there is another bondond, there is another bondond, there is another bondond, there is another bondond, there is another bondond, there is another bondond, there is another bondond, there is another bondond, there is another bondond, there is another bondond, there is another bondond,
If you can do that, you'll know that I'm taking my yo code code code and I'm going to flannel it.
This is what they say.
flan of Yon chouke viconm
My tongue is very long.
Gen ti grenm.
I'm not the only one.
It's all about giving back to the community.
It's not a full-fledged generation.
I don't know how to cut it.
We've met a lot of people and we've been able to make a difference in their lives.
I am not fully aware of it.
I'm not cutting it.
I'm not cutting it.
I'll tell you what I can do about it.
We don't know how to sing.
It's like Ben.
Or they'll take you there.
I know I'm not the only one who knows you're in the middle of nowhere.
I know what I'm talking about.
I don't know how I got there.
We're not going to be able to do that anymore.
I'm not going to be able to do this for a while.
There is no such thing as a tofu.
Gen calibis t
Once again, I feel like there's something to be said for getting in your way and I feel like there's something wrong with you.
They look like a pit that is not a pit.
Li gen yon non w pati kay.
on pati woum metan m dan kay o concerto
There is a ceiling.
I've been waiting for you to come to the pit.
The man or woman whose soul is in the pit is the man or woman whose soul is in the pit is the man or woman whose soul is in the pit is the man or woman whose soul is in the pit is the man or woman whose soul is in the pit is the man or woman whose soul is in the pit is the man or woman whose soul is in the pit is the man or woman whose soul is in the pit is the pit.
They are renamed pengwen.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Hey, you're playing Jebi, you're playing Jebi, you're playing Jebi, you're playing Jebi, you're playing Gata, you're playing Gata, you're playing Gata, you're playing Gata, you're playing Gata, you're playing Gata, you're playing Gata, you're playing Gata, you're playing Gata, you're playing Gata, you're playing the game, you're playing the game, you're playing the game, you're playing the game, you're playing the game, you
Are you going to buy a tonba or a bon bon yen?
It's all right.
Let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let's go, let
It's also a genus.
pikan w lan nonmi
E, e baby from kaye mit e, kaye mit lan te yon redev.
It's like, what's wrong with you, what's wrong with you, what's wrong with you, what's wrong with you, what's wrong with you, what's wrong with you, what's wrong with you, what's wrong with you, what's wrong with you, what's wrong with you, what's wrong with you, what's wrong with you, what's wrong with you, what's wrong with you, what's wrong with you, what's wrong with you, what's wrong with you, what'
If you want to make a lot of Chabon, you can do a lot of good things.
What am I supposed to do?
There is no guarantee that you'll be able to pay the bills.
They know how beautiful I am.
In front of the competition a
Yo anje Choublat
They are very close to Soléy and Lan.
Yo anch Noun is the other lan lok choun blak
The confidentiality is clear.
Li ti goul, se sa, who is goul who is not a lava gadveke li, ken re re?
Who would want to give you a gift of milk and honey?
I'm going to tell you about Fèy Dikou.
I'm going to go out and do it for you.
krele fèy dikou
I'm going to take care of you.
They don't even know what they're doing.
The new generation is putting out an hour to meet the new generation so that they can make a living or pay their debts.
Nou gen rele l.
I'm going to kill you.
E is a.
I know I'm going to make a mistake and I'm going to make a mistake.
M bakan li, on woukou?
She is a grandmother.
There is a need for people and a need for people.
Yes, there are people who want to know about it.
There are many ways to do this.
Some people use a writing system to make a long list of dishes.
There is a lot of money to be made.
I'm going to write it down.
Ten men or li li are in charge of a
The tanks are still standing.
There's a lot to be said for piping.
We don't give anyone a chance to go back to the seventh.
And then there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that, there's that
After a few days of preparation, my feet hurt very much.
I don't know what to do with the water.
Do you know what I'm talking about and what I'm talking about?
It's a great way to get a feel for yourself.
Alcohol has nothing to do with it.
Well, how am I supposed to live, do everything, how are you, how are you doing, what are you doing?
It's a good thing that so many of them are now converting themselves to Vi kont bousseyère tou piti.
Where there are so many flowers, they don't have a good color, and they don't have a lot of colors.
No one else is going to do it.
Behind the scenes is a man.
Or who is going to pay for it?
Dina Lachas, sin, or anyone else who knows you, does not know you, sin, or evil?
Well, maybe two, maybe two, maybe one to catch a fish.
What about you and me?
Yes, there are two.
It's about someone who has a special place in my heart.
They're too far away.
So much for the people.
What do you want to know?
I don't know why you're looking at this guy.
You've got two people to talk to.
You're the only one who knows who you are.
I don't want anyone to sin.
I'm sure you'll know.
You'll find a lot of water in the water.
I'm going to leave.
They pass through the water, and then they see it in the water.
It's just water.
They know how to keep them in the water.
I'm going to eat.
I started work on the Bongavek and the Mayan Islands.
The Mayan civilization was at its peak.
As a matter of fact, I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to do that.
The key is to re-establish it.
Now I know who he is.
Well, as if you were looking for a fish, there is a party at the top of the bottle or a, where jedi and a one-night stand are.
It's a relief.
No, as if you can hold on to jen lan, li anlè a.
I'm going to call them back.
Well, how do you know where you're going to put it in a bottle?
Jankon jan yo relayed this to you?
So, is there another way?
Well, I'm on the other side of the ball.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to figure it out.
La la a no no
as if they were.
The fish genome is ne
It's as if I can breathe as I can get into the men's room.
I'm not going to say anything.
Conde weelel and jwa
Eleven of them are still alive.
I don't know who he is.
I've come to the point where I don't know how to do this.
as a result of the loss of the equation.
Are you ready to go to bed?
Well, it's up to you to withdraw your allowance.
I don't know how to do that.
Wi, an tou soodi yo bon.
I'm going to have leprosy on my hands.
Anyone who advises my brother knows what to do or what not to do.
I'm sorry about that.
You've got a lot to do with it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it too late.
I don't want to write my letter.
It's the law of the jungle.
I'm going to tell you.
I called one sadin, I called one advance.
Gen yon is the reason, gen yon is the reason, after sa gen yon is the reason.
Let me know if I know.
I've never heard of it.
Chijon prason is celebrated?
I'm the only person who's ever been born, but I don't know how to buy.
I can buy it.
I'm going to buy it.
If I buy something I don't know how to buy it.
After the city is built, you can buy or sell it.
It's about the same size as yours.
They were born a long time ago.
I was born again.
There's a problem with being born again.
And then there's another celebration.
It's been a long holiday.
It's not like you're going to be able to pull it off.
I don't know who I am and I don't know who I am.
I told him I couldn't make it.
The one who gives no fruit, the one who gives no fruit, the one who gives no fruit, the one who gives no fruit, the one who gives no fruit, the one who gives no fruit, the one who gives no fruit, the one who gives no fruit, the one who gives no fruit.
I don't know what I'm going to do next.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
I'm not going to be able to do anything about it.
Men know how to comp
The bra is for you.
I know you're on the Palmis.
As they say, I'm sorry.
What do you want to know again?
Learn how to read.
I'm going to say yes.
Yon renlè lanmandye
One of the gods is more powerful than the other.
One of the main reasons for this is the fact that it is not possible to get pregnant.
Open it up to me.
Or how do I get rid of it?
What is the date of my birthday?
Pech la up toulon.
How is it that you were born?
As they were made, they needed to be cleaned.
If you know me, I don't know anyone else.
There is no such thing as a man.
I'm not going to lie to you.
Now we are on our way to Dayiti.
on the time of Zyèb pye pou l
It's a lot of work for me.
Do you know where I am?
They know what they're doing.
Whoever says it, knows the flèch.
Kiyan li born, where do I know you now?
I don't know if it's more than that, but that's because.
If you're happy, you'll be outside.
Or do you know that, as I said in the previous 11 verses, it is a record?
Non-record or not.
If you don't know the pentad, you know the pentad.
No one is going to break your record.
Who are these two men?
There are two types of l...
This is Zeb Bentad.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
What do you mean?
It's all about the people.
Even on two pranen or well
I'm not going to take it anymore.
How do you get the courage to do it?
One hundred and fifty years ago.
It's the first time I've seen it.
I'm with someone who puts you in a coat of arms.
I'm not going to lie to you.
I've been working with Chari one's account.
One method of doing this is to get the job done.
Working with beef la yo
Nice work.
Chari's equality with men works in a branch of a debt equals the equality with men's equality with men's work.
Men and women in the wine industry have a lot to do with wine.
Men rapou rete a men rapou rete a men rapou rete a men rapou rete a men rapou rete a men rapou rete a men rapou rete a men rapou rete a men rapou rete a men rapou rete a men rapou rete a men rapou rete a men rapou rete a men rapou rete a men rapou rete a
It's the same as taking a chariot.
I'm going to take a look at the charts.
The lottery is on its way to the chariot.
They took a lot of money from the charity.
I'm going to have to do it again.
It doesn't matter how you make it work.
Equal men in the workplace.
It's not about the animals and the work they're doing.
I'm going to do something about it.
I'm open to excess.
Open the economy and you'll have to pay for it.
I'm on my way to people.
Open your way.
Open your way to people.
I'm not a lawyer.
I'm going to see how many of them are out there without me.
I don't know if it's true or not.
I'm going to find you.
Or my grandfather, if you're a mother in law, or if you're a father in law, or if you're a father in law.
It's finally over.
I took Ataryam and put it to charity.
I took it as a silicone and put it on my face.
I've got you.
E or pale m do do do donte
I don't know if I'm going to make it yet.
I know my teeth are pale.
I don't want to hear about you anymore.
Pan reponnye kounn donte chwal.
Yo chon lan se up yo.
Isn't that your command?
Don't be fooled by the fact that kibakou never passes through acharikite.
It's about your weight.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to use it.
It doesn't matter if you end up with a new job or not.
It doesn't matter what other beef is.
The other beef is to make the other beef or the other beef.
I'm ready for you.
Ap prate l ba ou.
I don't even know if I'm going to make it.
Bef sa a tandan l ap vinprepa yo even
I'm in the mood for wine.
I'm ready for the wine.
I'm ready for wine or I'm ready for wine.
I'm ready for the wine and I'm ready for the wine and I'm ready for the wine.
I've been waiting for you.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
I've been waiting for you.
I've been waiting for you.
is equal to the equals.
Or someone in front of you.
Even behind me, I was ready to go upstairs.
Ef la yon person in front of you
Ap redine sou li
Now I'm going to put my finger on it.
What do you want me to do?
It's hard to explain what happened after the birth of the baby.
This is the birth of a genius.
A packet of tea and beef.
or regal or packet a
The façade of the cathedral.
It's not a bad thing.
I can't wait to get started.
Let's get started on this.
I'm going to tell you a little bit.
It is possible for a gene to be passed on from one generation to the next.
Aske gen kote te asoup than others.
Before that, it was the same as before.
Either distant or far away.
or wine an disanst or men kase koube an nou dò
Or wine the first time you do it.
The key is to make sure that you are able to use the kach fwasad.
I can't wait to see what you're up to.
Equal to a déjà pa ke
The same can be said of the human soul in the middle of the night.
Timik sa koto pa ke w pa zil lagaten
There are a lot of people in the crowd.
Before the team.
They're the team's best.
Where I fell into a crowd.
How do I get the crowd to take a shot?
or rennot kout cha ak or revire
Or go back to a glass of wine.
There's nothing I can do about it.
It's a great way to get to know each other.
It's the first time I've done this.
There is no other way to do this.
Regardless of the decade, there's a lot going on.
At the end of the day, there's a lot going on.
It's a new way of looking at things.
It's not like I'm going to tell you the truth, but I'm going to tell you the truth.
I'm going to take it easy.
I can't wait to see it.
I can't wait to get back to school.
It's a great way to get to school.
They are all new.
They are all new.
This is why I'm here to help you with the Gwonp Bèf Chari la.
There is only one driver.
I'm going to tell you about the eleven or eleven.
I'm not going to try again.
Gen m pòcharya ramyon
I'm going to continue.
The men I've worked with and the men I've worked with are stealers of wine and wine.
I'm the first person in my family to have a good relationship with you.
I've been with you twice and I'm twisting.
It's also a job to make people coffee.
People go to work.
Or continue to speak on your donte a tou yo
Do pass se a trivè m
I'm not going to be able to work until I'm at work.
Agon nou tou gen 2 nonmèv today a
I'm going to take good care of it.
It's a lot of work for a lot of people.
And at work a bourre te bon man
I don't want to turn around.
It's not just about men.
I'm also a virgin.
I've been waiting for you guys.
I'm in the middle of nowhere.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
Lawonpo plen
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to do that.
Sa adwa t al touf viye
It's all right with you.
La Engali also makes Masak
Wap ple debate yo e yo evapot yo
We have a legal chak gen from your side.
It's time to get to the bottom of everything and get to the bottom of everything.
I don't want to be the same person as I am.
It's not even like I'm going to buy a beef and go for a walk.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do that.
I know how to use the account to serve adwat
I have become a patagou and I need to be a great servant.
If I buy a beef, I know it's rabbi's turn.
This is the form of the mande yo.
To your left is the same.
I'm going to tell you everything about us.
In the left hand corner, you know where you are or what you're getting yourself into.
I'm going to take a look at some of the things I've done.
It's either going to be gas or it's going to be gas.
When the men are ready, they are ready.
Or by the way.
You've got to work hard.
I'm glad you're here and I'm here to help you.
They can.
Li avonn li a tout kouk chonv disyen
They don't have to be doubled.
They're not going to be able to keep up with what's going on.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm going to kill you.
I'm going toupe you Bon
If you don't know what you're talking about.
If you want to know Chari nou bef Chari
What do I have to do to make it work?
Am I going to ask these people for a third man?
I'm not good at it.
I don't know if I'm going to make it yet.
It's not like I'm new here.
I'm not sure if that's true or not.
I hadn't seen them before.
I'm here for you and I'm here for you.
I'm going to tell you about it.
There's no way I can tell you what I want you to do.
Tell me what you're doing on the bed even now.
I'm still waiting for you to come back to me.
I don't know what I'm going to do.
It's not like we're going to be able to do it.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Do do rale chari tou
Men are even chari l al.
It's not even in the bay.
Well, I'm going to take the chariot.
I'm going to give you a chance to find out what's going on.
The difference between the animals and the good chariots is one year.
Now in front of the men
I can't wait to see what you're up to.
I'm not sure what to do about it and I'm not sure what to do about it.
I can't wait to get in there.
Come and have a drink with me.
Come and have a party.
I can't wait to see what I've been through.
I'm going to end up like this.
I'm three years old.
Men are either male or female.
They're going to have to do what they're going to have to do in the meantime, and they're going to have to do what they're going to have to do in the meantime.
I'm not sure if I'm ready or not.
It's not like I'm going to be able to get through the whole thing.
It's not that I don't want to see my teeth.
I'm the only one who can offer or even offer.
The two of them met in the same room at the same time as the two of them.
The same can be said of the two high schools in the M-turn where they are equated with the right one.
Okay, now, men can't hide here, everything can't hide in the middle of the room in front of the door.
No, if you don't want to bury me, can you put them in a pot?
It's not like I'm going to re-evaluate it.
This is the genesis of the Lab.
gwen m ap chari a tana
Danmel is not the only one.
Chari rety ap abò isit
It's time to get back to the drawing board.
Take them back to the next level.
Either way, you've got to get back on track.
The lady is truly a chariot.
Men are not allowed to do so.
It's all about consensus.
It's the same as Jan
Keoula pou n y al an nou repale
If men are confident in your new cause of illness.
How can I talk to you?
Well, then, if you take Charya answit you won't be able to do it, you won't be able to do it, you won't be able to do it.
I'm going to get rid of the code.
There's a lot more to it than that.
I have a code for it.
I've been waiting for you to come back.
I have a code for buffering.
Lik Se and Ayigon are here.
It's like I'm in the middle of something, or I'm in the middle of something, or I'm in the middle of something.
I'm late for the next one.
Don't worry about me.
or revert to adwat la.
There are only a handful of coastlines.
It's not up to the others.
I've been waiting for you to come up with something.
There are a lot of people out there who don't care.
They turn on the canmen
I'm going to tell you too.
The men have been there for a long time.
Basically, you want other people to know about you.
What is my position in the world and what is my position in the world?
I've got a lot of money on my hands.
I'm going to the beach.
When I was a kid, I had a baby.
This is how you can make an album.
I've been waiting for you in my life.
I am the angel of the gospel.
Even if I were to say that I could become a rep reptilian.
Well, I'm going to go with an ice cream cone, if you don't mind.
When you're lucky, when you're running, when you're running, when you're running, when you're running.
Lord Fatihi, why do you leave me?
What do you think of Chari's only appearance?
When is it only Chari's fault?
What kind of love is there?
If the coffee is a raprane
Seloufèk a pa pran mennen chari a
I'm not going to go back to the drawing board.
or lage tout comme ale
I'm going to bring a car.
Since then, there have been two chariots.
lou won pa k aleve laten sa a la
They can also be used by the police.
Since then, there have been two papers.
Or take your car.
Jan Bef has taken up arms.
They've been working hard to get the job done.
O konn grawa
I know how to play the game too.
Or just take a beef.
I'm going to take a look at you guys.
It doesn't matter to you.
There's a lot more to it than that.
It's all about the people and the people.
Or someone who's been beefing it up.
I'm not even going to make a short cold beef.
It's just a matter of time before it's gone.
I'm going to have a cold shower or I'm going to make a delicious snack or something.
Egal or kale komoko or tou
Equal quantity for or part of beef and veal.
Whoever is going to be there is going to be there as well.
Thank you very much for the fine print of Form Net that works well.
Eske mizè fresh or sandwa trayè yon sanft or sandwa trayè fòt la men
Let's say you're a big fan of men.
There are two tonnes in the shape of a man.
The form of the man is the form of the form of the granfrot.
or grandfather lopin lan chari a
Men came in the form of a granfrot and could tagnase the two of them.
You're the only one who can help us.
We have a long way to go.
Several times I still kissed all the members of the staff at work.
Or not born for the people of the world or the people of the world.
The seed and the seed of the newlyweds.
I can't tell you what to do next.
Our depou ourele l depou ourele l
They are the same or their father Chanko has no money.
Mès e ou ke w ap m tri brother l Emen like a beef
They know how to work.
For those of you who know me well, I'm here to help you.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
If I don't want to do it, I will.
I don't know what to say.
Now you don't have any beef.
You don't know if I'm going to ask or not.
I'm sure you'll be able to find some gas.
I'm going to try to find a way out of this mess.
Or is this the only way I can do this job?
How do I get the job done?
If you don't want to work, you don't have to work.
It's been a long time since I've been on a picnic.
Don't worry about it.
Don't be fooled by this.
I'm going to be with you all the time.
Chak jou an w mete yon chak jou an w vire l
Where's your purse and your backpack?
And the wine is very tasty.
You will see the Lord.
Zion's wilderness has been transformed into a mountain.
There is no such thing as a bad luck charm.
The science behind it is a science behind it.
What are the advantages and disadvantages of science?
Whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever.
Whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever, whatever,
Because you're going to win what you're going to win.
kriyesyonnen yon aze
When the train passes by, the rope runs through it.
This is where Amaya came from.
Before you can get your job done.
You'll have a chance to work with a man at work.
There is no doubt that there are many different types of apidwonn li.
They're going to be more helpful.
Since then, it has become more and more popular.
Ko yon charyas akonjekte aklazi
I'm going to tell you what I'm talking about.
I'll take you with me.
Or you can do it.
Yo pasan vay ak pik way isi
And then there's the two of them.
as se charyas lalè
men or of m konsan or gen wale nan man.
Men, if they return to the same way as I did, or if they return to the same way, they will return to the same way.
Atisal Servi was responsible for the deaths of Denimon and Kenbe.
Denimon is the driving force behind you.
Driving a car is a man's job.
It's not like you're going to be able to do anything right now.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything about it.
I'm going to try to get back on track.
I'm a high school fan, but I'm not a big fan.
It's not about anyone.
I've been blessed with a lot of them.
Is it too late, and is it too late?
It's made of steel and brass.
I haven't done a good job since then.
It's been a while since I've finished.
I've been working hard since then.
I will be retiring soon.
I'm going to retire soon, but I'm going to retire soon.
If I'm not a mechanic, I'm not going to be a mechanic, I'm going to be a mechanic, I'm going to be a mechanic, I'm going to be a mechanic, I'm going to be a mechanic, I'm going to be a mechanic, I'm going to be a mechanic, I'm going to be a mechanic, I'm going to be a mechanic, I'm going to be a mechanic, I'm going to be a mechanic, I'm going to be
I've been waiting for you to come here.
Eighty years later, there are eighty angels in heaven.
I'm going to be beef la vechan.
I'm with Ayigon
It's all in your head.
Chase is the best.
I'll tell you what I'm going to tell you.
I've been waiting a long time to get to know you.
They're worth a lot of money.
Or do you have to go to your own place?
I'm not sure how to use the app for anyone else.
Li sou bay ti people in kou ba chak jou bat li
Li vin abitwam akou Li pa an
They're in good shape.
If you're good at it, you're good at it.
There is no doubt that there is a problem with rabies.
If I run the rabou ravèk li
I can't wait to see what you do with it.
You've got to keep your head up and be careful.
In the meantime, we're currently in the process of making a decision.
6 zanm ap rabouyou with men bef la
Am I on a grifondate right now?
They're in the middle of it.
I'm not a big fan of it.
Li genjan an
I'm not going to lie to you guys.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to keep up with that.
You can use it or use it.
There are many ways to improve WI
There are two types of bonuses available.
Great li adwa of men who sit or
And then there's the question of whether it's worth it.
Typically, it is a generic term used to refer to a service provider or service provider.
There is a lot of pressure on them.
It's all in your head.
They're coming or going.
They're in the middle of nowhere.
They're going to come in or out of the way.
They're either on the road or they're on the road.
They're from Alò.
It is convenient for you to make a chariot.
It's been a while since I've fallen into debt and it's been too long.
Or to buy it.
They're good.
It is the tenth to m
Or you can use it in your mouth.
How can you use it for rabouy aliyy?
Yeah, well, I know how much of an attraction you've got so far.
Then I told you.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
When the detector arrives, is the triatta again on the same page?
I'm not going to inspect you, I'm going to inspect you.
In the same tract, I am not going to try it, but I am going to try it.
Every thing that happens to me is a good thing.
It's a good idea to have a good time.
Gen sa ki pa bon
The good news is that there's a lot going on.
Gen bon vele pote a
Good luck to you.
We'll take you to the branch.
I'm not a fan of Gen di m sa
It's one of the most common commands.
The new generation is going through a new generation and a new generation is going through a new generation and a new generation is going through a new generation and a new generation is going through a new generation and a new generation is going through a new generation and a new generation is going through a new generation and a new generation is going through a new generation and a new generation is going through a new generation and a new generation is going through a new generation.
With you b ap charye lan
I'm not sure about that.
I'm not sure what to do with it.
When ordering a coupe, you don't know how to cut it.
I've been given the gift of wine.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
I'm going to do this with a grant.
It's the genesis of my life.
They passed through the middle of the bowl.
It's not a wine touring, it's a wine touring, it's a wine touring, it's a wine touring, it's a wine touring, it's a wine touring, it's a wine touring, it's a wine touring, it's a wine touring, it's a wine touring, it's a wine touring, it's a wine touring, it's a wine touring, it's a wine touring, it's a wine touring, it's a wine
What do you think they're going to say?
Nan, nan panvin, man said to the Dewan.
It's in the middle.
You're going to have to go back to the drawing board.
You've got a lot to do with it.
You've brought people past you.
Among other things, I'm not sure.
I'm not a man.
I went through the middle.
If you're going to be able to get a drink and a cup of tea, you're going to have to plan for the next couple of days.
I'm going to have a car and a cup of tea in the Alps and a Devan I'm going to have a cup of tea.
If you don't want to go to the bathroom, you can't go to the bathroom.
Now they're going to kill you.
I love you chwal
You can sell up all month.
I can't wait to get up there.
your ap kabicha w.
Contrary to popular belief, benzene and benzene are not the same thing.
There's a lot of uncertainty.
I can't wait to get started.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
Gonchè, leg to leg, leg to leg to leg to leg.
Who are you?
People are going to make a fuss.
The people of the country are very proud of you.
Some of you have been told that you don't want to give up.
Yep, it's been a while since I've been to chak madyon an ki chak mwat jen
It's because you're not doing it.
If I have children, or if I refuse to have children, then I will not be able to have children.
Now break li chak chak m chak m batou an odò
Because I don't want to be rediscovered or disregarded by children like you.
You have to travel through it.
You're going to have to take the kids.
I want to give my mother the opportunity to show her respect for the child.
You have to respect the child's mother when she's not in the car.
My mother did not say anything about whether or not I was born with respect for the child.
I'm more than happy with my son.
It's not like I'm going to be a kid or anything like that.
Even as a child, Paul was not there.
in any bidding process.
Because even the poles are lying in their beds.
I took good care of the men.
I don't want to have to take a massage to get anything done.
Who do you think I should respect?
Because you're a man.
I'm not sure who I'm talking about.
It's not like I don't have a sister.
Menwen is a kabrit code in the koudou bali
They're not even close to being touched, they're not even close to being touched.
My mother's mother told me to go to the bathroom.
It's not like we're going to get a woman's haircut.
It's so much more than that.
Le sa kay kikan an stand debut ditou.
Zone not, soun yo a, konni ki yi seonnani is second kat.
Well, soun, you can't do that too.
How do you know you're not clever?
It is derived from chak chak.
be a french fried marin
Chak moun is derived from enkalwil
I can't wait to see what happens next.
If you are a person with a great interest in knowledge, you will have a great deal of experience.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
If you can't win, you can't beat anyone.
Some people don't even know my mother.
You can't destroy them completely.
Or vice versa, if you're going to be able to do it, you're going to be able to do it.
I also know how to put myself in the position of discovering other things.
I took a pay cut to mount a gel.
Don't worry, don't worry, don't worry, I'm with you.
Or I'll leave it alone.
Don't worry about it.
anyenne a l odwe
The truth is that there are many more.
Citizens are entitled to one.
Or in front of you or behind you, in front of you or behind you.
I'm going to tell you something.
We're not going to talk about it anymore.
It's true that we've got our hands full.
The men are in the gang.
I'm going to tell you about Sonson.
You're not going to feel sorry for yourself.
I don't want to get into trouble.
I've just started a dialogue with you.
I've just had a dialogue with you on the subject.
With the gravity of the sky, who knows what is going on.
I'm going to gravye I'm good to tan ap pale and together re re re re
Now you're going to have to dig a new one and then you're going to have to do a thousand miles a year.
It's all about the year.
One of them is a young man.
No, it's not the same.
If you want to have children, you can also have children.
Their children have died.
The son of the deceased died.
I can't or won't be able to have children.
I'm going to do everything I can to make sure that I don't have to go to the bathroom.
I'm going to ride a horse.
Bourik ben and horse livè a point horse a, that's nice bourik.
If it is a member, if it is a brother, if it is a brother, if it is a brother, if it is a brother, if it is a brother, if it is a brother, if it is a brother, if it is a brother, if it is a brother, if it is a brother, if it is a brother, if it is a brother, if it is a brother, if it is a brother, if it is a brother, if it is a brother.
If you don't know what's going on, you're going to have to pay for it.
I'm going to tell you about Sigabye Matten and
I'm going to take a look at the Granfaya Mountains.
I can't wait to get here.
Now I can't put my finger on it.
I'm the same as you.
They don't want to let you down.
So, how do you make two pounds of milkshake?
There is no allotment of milk.
If you want me to write to you, you have to write to me.
That's the way it is with Mouche.
I'm not sure what it is.
You've got to be all right.
I'm going to tell you the truth.
It's not all about you.
Are you going to milk cabri tea or not?
Letters of cabri, beef, beef, or what do you want me to do for you?
What is it that they write about?
I'm looking forward to seeing other men.
Take it or leave it.
I want you to be a member of my family.
I don't know what to do with my account.
Chak vaten or nitwaye yo epi
or bay you now
Vaten or nitwaye yo chak
I'm going to have a drink with you.
We don't know what to eat anymore.
You can ask for a second chance to see if you have children.
I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results and I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results.
Tandan chak jou w ap veye l
I don't want to have children or have sex with them.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
You'll know your name when you're new.
I've just been hit by a tree souri te
You're going to be a father for a year.
Li wkwazi l.
kozman dechès yeah
Or they could have children of their own and make a man of their own.
I'm going to have a baby.
Men have made progress in a new way.
Look at you and be nice to your mother.
Two series I'm going to have to go through all of the new stuff if I lose my son Conchan.
I'm going to buy you tounan men.
That's the way it is.
W ap vann yo epi epi
Since then, I've been able to have children.
I'm going to have a baby.
I am the son of Jodiyal La An
Until the end of my life.
I'm going to kill you and I'm not going to have any children with you.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
It's not like we're going to tell you.
It's not that we don't know.
I've been waiting for you so long.
There is a ton of it.
If you want to do something about it, you need to know how to do it.
You can't be too big for me.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
I am the Lord's servant and I am the Lord's servant and I am the Lord's servant and I am the Lord's servant and I am the Lord's servant.
I'm more than you.
I'm going to tell you a story.
I'm going to take a look at it.
Learn a little bit about it.
ap wap cap ap mete kote mal
How can you be overweight?
It's bad and it's bad.
I know I'm wrong.
Pass, w ap mande m al coukontem.
An, mon, eranda vin full l te or pa peze vant yo, wè yo full l?
Anba kou yo wine great, isiti yo la wine great.
I want to talk about it, or I want to acknowledge it.
They have a genus of 3 grains.
I can't get enough of this whole thing.
They are entitled to a privilege.
It is very difficult to get rid of them.
It can be worn out.
I'm the only one who's worth it, and I'm the only one who's worth it.
I'm going to try and get some wine.
I've been waiting for you for a while.
I'm going to Waze lavèk w on pou lè cheval rouge lè m going to ban m cheval Boren
Fishing can be done on horseback or on horseback.
They are prohibited from speaking.
I'm going to have to take it.
I have to take a long way off.
I'm not sure if this is a good idea.
If I want you to know, I want you to know.
It is derived from a polynomial and a polynomial.
I'm going to take care of you.
I have an account that I can't find.
If you're a big fan of the sea, then you're a big fan of the sea.
The other two are here.
Or if he has a wife or has a husband, he will steal evil, so that he may be able to sleep in his sleep.
Husband or wife, I want to say goodbye.
Man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man, man,
I am forbidden to drink on two occasions.
They love the wine.
More people are coming to the rescue.
The more people I come to love, the more I come to love.
Men don't fall in love with each other.
The colour of men is the colour of men who love li.
They don't give up on L.
They're in the middle of nowhere.
There are many ways to divide the three.
or consistently deployed.
It's hard for me to understand.
Seve li lanvig
He is the one who sent me to you, and I am the one who sent me to you.
The sound of your voice and your mouth.
I'm sorry to hear that you can't find it.
If I love them, I'll lead you to the colours.
Yes, they're ready, they're ready in color.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it through the next few weeks.
There's a lot more going on in the fridge.
I'll move when I'm ready to make a choice, and I'll know when I'm ready.
One of the shortest shots ever fired.
I can't wait to see it.
Generations of men can't make a fool of themselves on touy
Put your mother or mother on it.
Or maybe it's just that.
I'm going to try to find my mom.
In the meantime, they'll be able to do what they need to do.
You know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
I don't know how it works.
I'm going to try to find a way out of it.
I'm very happy with the results and I'm very happy with the results.
I'm looking forward to the next few months.
Put on some jiman and tou a.
etlonbouyeg la m ken be code of my epi
Peres of the code m
I'm the driver.
I'm driving the car and I'm getting out of the car.
The appliance comes from the automobile and is equipped with a built-in valve.
It's like tooth whitening.
I'm the only one who can do it.
I'm going to try and find a way.
Generally speaking, if the book is not available, they do not use the book chak fa.
It's not just me, it's you.
M chen is French, anlò kone, mè si.
When will I be able to have children?
They gave birth to the children of Ennan too.
Then I'll take you to the bathroom with me.
I'm not sure if my children have the disease.
Sa avangon si konn men pedans
They'll always know.
wip bèt yo gen pèdans doyen
I'm going to tell you something like that.
It's full of shit and it's all falling apart.
It's a great way to win.
I'm going to see the whole thing again.
And I'm going to drink it before I take it.
They have the right to know the full extent of the situation.
An pran pedès san apite.
Thou hast given me, or thou hast given me, Talè, Talè, men fyi amen, fyi amen pedans pa laven matye.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Li gen dwan te te ansent for people
I know what you're talking about.
The men of the wine and the bay viril
You're going to be a man.
It's not going to happen.
There are twelve times as many as pi.
Li gen dwan tonbi
Li gen dwan you take any of the currenvi
The wine has fallen to the tour.
There are many types of pedans.
In fact, when I'm drinking wine and my husband is having a lot of fun with it.
Well, the big two haven't changed, but they've done nothing.
It's great to see people dancing and dancing together.
Even if the child has a soul and a body, it is also a human being.
The same is true of a network.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I'm trying to revive my husband and give him a phone call.
It is a remedy for skin infections.
The same child.
As a matter of fact, it's the only way to get rid of them.
Wine is produced in the form of wine.
The men are close to one another.
This is the beginning of a revival.
I've seen a lot of great wines especially.
If you want to buy them, buy them.
It's not like you're the only one who knows what you're talking about.
Yo m alonm bann under the tivant li
I've made friends with men, but I'm still with men.
They're coming back.
They're always different.
I thought I was going to have a baby.
They were not able to have children.
They say that the beef is a slippery slope or a slippery slope or a slippery slope or a slippery slope.
They are not child-bearing.
And you're about to have a baby.
I've been on the ceiling for a few months now.
I'm sure you'll be able to get a signal if you've got a lot of information coming in.
I can't have children.
I call it work, it's bad work.
Silvery ta fwon beef or sanchwa lou sason ta do too.
I'll tell you what I'm going to do.
You've got to be a good mechanic because you don't want to cut the big ones.
I don't know what to do with myself.
If you're going to do the same thing, you're going to do the same thing.
Sa se, sa se, or ta ta gle m, or ta ta gle l ve anvral a.
I'm sure you'll be able to restore it to its original state.
The people of Lari are the people of Lari.
I'm going to be there when I get there.
I'm here to help you.
Or else I could do something like that.
I'm all for it.
m ap format
It's all about the people.
If you want to know what's going on, go ahead.
I'm in the mood.
No one is going to be able to treat you right now, because you're not going to be able to treat me right now.
It's on the market today.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
We are going to take our horses to the bay li men.
gadenay cheval la
He said he knew how to ride a horse, but he didn't want to come back.
She's just like her mother.
I've been banned for a long time.
Children of the penmete children of the epi tou epi
It's a great way to get the wine out of the bottle.
I'm going to have to go to the bathroom.
I'm going to use the benzwen mouty.
You are a knight or knight.
The knight is a British knight.
I met him in front of the same person behind Rethlon.
I'm also a lousy person.
Ganov Kawalye and un Kawalye Yon Man
I'm sitting in the back seat in front of my wife.
I'm not the only one with you.
Can't touch the raj or the nou l
I'm not a woman, I'm a woman, I'm not a woman.
I'm going to run the race.
It's not easy to make a woman voyeur.
I'm going to take a horse.
Kiss me and I'll take you to the bay.
Now take the exant horse wa.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I'm also a fan of wine fwon an.
They won't be able to do it because they won't be able to do it in a timely manner.
They won't take it with a grain of salt.
How can I have children?
How much do we take with us if we don't have the right kind of children?
Mare lan pati ray
It's been a long time coming.
Marie lan balman ray's soul is in the wrong place.
They can't get enough of it.
My boots are under my skin and I'm going to take care of you.
I'm going to take a break from my job.
Grès yon prann mandwa a te and fa masib
I'm going to win it.
A penny in front of your head.
I'm going to win the fever.
I'm very curious to know the difference between nonchwal and nonchwal.
They're so promising.
I'm going to tell you how much I know about you.
You can send me a new one.
I can't explain it to you.
Or explain how to say everything that is not true.
I've come a long way since I was a kid.
Deyè good men sa k chwal
I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results.
Now I'm ready for a ride.
They pay an afle
Lofene and Li could not be left behind.
The elephants are the only ones who have the right to remain silent for the rest of their lives.
Now I'm on my way.
I'm afraid I won't be able to recall a man who died before he died.
I'm sure you'll be able to keep yourself or both of you very clean.
I know how to rap.
I'm going to code you to make it happen.
The code of conduct of this party is the code of conduct of the party.
It's going to be a weekly event.
Krenye is taking a horse to the other side.
I've been waiting for you to tell me a story.
I'm on the right side.
Or on the web beef.
I have a pen and a pen and a pen and I have a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen and a pen.
Either ton or beef, the horse is the same Lord.
He's been riding horses for so many years.
So much for anon
Now is the time for me to drink the oil and wine that fall on my horse's head before I can do it again.
Kiponpon gen ranzi a
Parthi people created a.
Including a
You are the man of Jeval
It's the same with men.
I'm going to tell you something new.
I know you've got an entire cellar in you.
to the base of the base.
I'm not going to lie to you.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
The horse will tell you.
I don't know if you're going to be able to do that.
The color of the horse la we
Gen cheval wouz
Gen men lag
Gen cheval non wè tou
I'm going to eat, as I'm going to eat.
I'd love to ride a horse and ride a horse.
The grey gene is also present.
There will be no more white blood cells.
It's not for the faint of heart.
Or put your money where your mouth is.
Or to make a new bread.
or bay make makout or bay make makout
Everything or nothing.
Or to make salt for it.
Or put a cup of coffee on it.
Put salt and vol or salt.
I got up in the middle of the night.
It's the Ferwal street and it's the Maché.
I'm going to buy it.
The bagen is your machine.
It's not like I'm driving a car.
There's no need to bring a tonbo to the cart.
or an l tonbo
Now I'm going to make a map.
This is a tonbo ay kòman.
They are designed to make you new.
I put the demands on the men and I married the two horses.
Or you'll wear a mask on your own.
Men for you men
It's the only thing I've ever seen and everything I've ever seen.
It's a good idea to buy and sell.
It's like having two bottles of wine.
The Tibetan language is spoken by the Tibetan people.
Tibet is the birthplace of Tibet.
It's time for you to get on with your life.
It's either too big or too small.
Prote turned into a chareta to ride a horse.
Well, am I right or wrong to go a mile or so, but what is my choice?
Do I need it?
I don't need a horse or a pair of horses.
sim needing horse men lad
Did I ever get to ride horses?
I'm calm until I'm with the right quality.
If it is colored with oubezon an
The color of the oubezon an
I can't wait to get out of here.
Obezman I do what I do.
Or toukò until i and nepot
I can't help but wonder.
I can't wait to see what they come up with.
It's just that I can't get enough of it, and I'm not going to be able to get enough of it.
It's not a bad idea.
I don't want to spend too much money.
So now it's time for me to give you $300 for Sanbyas.
It's all good money.
Wherever I am I'm going to go.
I'm going to take a look at it.
It has the capacity to generate energy.
A, the horse is now beef!
Wondering if you're going to get married?
Even if we were married, who would you marry?
What kind of horse do you think I'm going to ride right now?
I'm in the mood for something.
He's a good boy and he's got a nice coat.
The man knows what he's doing.
The good news is that you've got two beef cattle.
Li denm metan w horse horse and venn bay pou l now
Men or men chwal la se m bagre lanvan.
Or if you're good, you're good, you're good, you're good, you're good, then I'll take your cell.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to keep up or not.
I'm going to have to deal with this problem as if I love it.
Litterly, the genome is attached to the beef al boyè in the canal.
I can't wait to get my hands on it.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
I'm going to make some soup and some fine wine and some fine grain water.
Either way, there's another way to do it, because the force of the chak moun gen sou pa ou men.
I am fully satisfied with the great man of W.
I'm with you on the other side.
We're going to have a lot of misery and sadness.
pa w straight
I'm going to miss you.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do with my kids.
Now you're going to have to take a look at it.
Silon silon is two people.
The men were very pleased with the results.
Men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, men, and women, and men, all of you.
For a long time I drank and drank.
There is no limit to the amount of alcohol that can be consumed.
I'm going to try to get my hands on it.
I drink peys entit grey.
They don't drink the pout or the other cups they drink.
You have to let yourself be Genvedigè.
I'll let you do it.
Let's hear it for Maken Moou.
Are you going to leave me or are you going to leave me?
You're going to have to pay for it.
Do you have the right to remain silent?
It may not be the same.
I'll give you a good night's work.
I don't want to dance because I'm here.
I don't want to kill your mouth.
The horse is dead for the moment.
If they die, they will die.
People are not taking care of themselves.
If you are to blame.
The beef is dead.
Since then, I have either died of old age or died of old age.
If I do not agree with him, he will kill me.
Nou fèden bouden with san bef la mêmeEN.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
Obe all the people.
All men, not all men are men.
The men of San Bef la
W gondar pran l prof prof prof prof prof prof prof prof prof with m
Either I'm going back to school, or I'm going back to school right now with my baby.
Yeah, yeah, I'm going to be a bit nervous.
San bef la
We've got a lot of work to do to get back on track.
I'm going to meet Lan Bay.
Gang against the Besoon Li
I'm going against the grain.
The men of Chwal la li menmen
There's nothing I can do and use.
The horse and the salt of the sea can be found on the prophet landyab.
At the same time, there are times when we can't get enough of each other.
Or I'll give you an order to send or leave my horse.
Or I can let it pass.
So, there is only one person, only one genius, who knows, who knows.
Donk, this is menst.
All kinds of chwal gen even alòs mtapon an pa gen te chaval de tranje gen pou gen chaval l peyi lan
I don't know if it's the same or not.
Tabe rebe bayit tabe tranye
I'm not sure how much I'm going to do.
I'm going to put myself out there and tell the truth, and I'm going to make a mistake.
I don't know what to do with myself.
But I'm sure I'll be able to put the truth behind me.
I can't get rid of a horse or a cow.
I'm in my room.
Men like you don't know what to do.
Let's take a look at what's going on here.
Nan gen choway alo
That's the way it is.
I'm still here with you.
Men with chwan l an choway ki gwo an option li tranje
with a choice of what to do.
Does he even care?
We're not the only ones who care.
No one is going to be able to keep up with him.
It's not even about you now, it's about you.
I don't know if I'm going to be a grandmother right now.
I don't want to ask anyone on the ground.
The app is now available in the US.
It's not about the French.
It's almost as if it's not there yet.
Many kiske m ap now
yenn kouche yon mwen now le.
The driver of the car is walking to the vineyard.
They're not going to walk with me anymore.
They are also known for their sense of humor.
They're not going to be able to keep up with what's going on.
I'm going to tell you about my commute.
Now se as a tomato now weighs seven pounds baggage of yo
I am a rambay as a person.
I can't wait to eat it.
Good luck to you and your family.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
Yon pou is now one pou.
Se lonjan lye
It's not just me, it's my son.
Kay men and fanyan pye
men and randon kay goul.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
There's a lot more to it than that.
We're going to have to go to a poultry farm if we don't have any.
It's all about you.
Now you're ready to eat.
If you're going to do something worthwhile, you're going to do it or you're going to do it.
Elvay yon chwal la
Elvay a barre too much too much.
If you are a sheep or goat, you can do it.
I'm going to take a break from it.
I'm going to use the word boiser as the seed of my field.
I've been waiting for you to tell me.
Twen Kabritan I hope to see you again.
on mouton tou wi
It's because of you.
They're just letting you go.
That's why I'm here.
Follow me into my father's garden now
I'm not a father.
They are devoted to l.
It's been a while since I've been here.
He or she has been living in my garden since the dawn of time.
It's also the same as the wild beast.
You've been in a relationship since you were born.
I cut off my head.
What if, when a neighbor enters it, I can't let you see me, my friend, my friend, for a neighbor?
to your neighbor.
Neighbors or neighbors or someone with whom you have a relationship.
I have come to enter Lanmaya chak would I be pa pa l yo yon pavle
The key is to set the target.
I'm going to try to make it up to you.
I'm going to take a shot at it.
I guess you can guess what I'm going to do.
Even the head of the cabbage can be taken.
It's the end of your life.
It is a non-compliance.
It is either a matter of law or a matter of law, as is often the case with the Senate.
You won't be able to cut off your head.
The men are not taking the lead.
The men took the lead.
We'll take care of it or we'll take care of it.
w the siege of the Admiralty of the Admiralty.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it.
He said he was a nonman and cut off his head.
A Kabrit Mwen pochou also won the video.
I'm not sure if I can do it or not.
Or maybe I'll put your body on the floor.
I don't know what to do with myself.
The man is either a man of his own making or a man of his own making.
I'm going to pay you for the garden.
I've been paid for it for a long time.
Yo dapò pay or betèt konjan
They're going to pay for it.
The menri paid yo jaden
They're not going to be able to do it.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
They have been deprived of praise since ancient times.
I can't wait to get to the people's room.
Lord, I am not pleased with men, but I am pleased with them.
I can't wait for my new garden.
My mobile phone is not enough to kill me to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to kill me, to
I can't wait to get started.
I can't wait to get started.
I can't get over it.
It's all about being able to communicate.
It's not enough to lose your tables and other tables so you don't want to lose your tables.
with a piece of writing paper.
It's a great way to save money.
It's time to move on to something new.
It's not like I'm going to bed.
I'm going to tell you right away, I'm going to tell you right away, I'm going to tell you right away.
It's over, but I'm not popping.
So that we may finally be able to put our words to you.
We have no idea what happened to Moses.
The words will come to mind.
The rest is up to you.
It's about the rest of the cell.
Or they'll be resting.
You can see it or you can't see it or you can't see it or you can't see it or you can't see it or you can't see it or you can't see it or you can't see it or you can't see it or you can't see it or you can't see it or you can't see it or you can't see it or you can't see it or you can't see it or you can't see it or you can't see it or you can't see it.
After a few nights, you'll be able to see a lot of people.
They're in the middle of nowhere.
Cutting off the breasts.
All the seventy papots.
cable on the moun tou
I'm going to jail for it.
This is also a tenmi.
Everything is wired on the phone.
Everything is wired to you.
It's all about men.
I've got a lot of people out there who don't care.
I'm going to tell you the truth.
It's the people's choice.
We are the people of the world.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
You can't drive a car without it.
I'm going to take a look at this one.
I'm going to tell you about the people who are poisoned.
There's no way anyone can tell you what's going on here.
I'm not going to school anymore.
I'm on my own car.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
Anpankou wè yon
I can see you.
There's no such thing as a council.
I'm not going to lie to you.
I can't wait to see what you're up to.
I'm sorry to disappoint you.
I'm just trying to get a grip.
The grain, the caterpillars, and many others keep you from doing your best.
First one three, I'll take care of it.
Men, how can you make more money off of benizon or two?
How can I or should I register you?
As a leader, I, the Lord, am willing to put up with this brother, put up with this brother, put up with this brother, put up with this brother, put up with it, put up with it.
I'm going to have a full-fledged childhood education.
It's not about the beef, it's about the beef.
It's time to move on to the next stage of life.
Get rid of the bat but bat
The same goes for Oube, ebontou, or sa se bontou, or sa ek pom mousi.
We've got two people I know who we are.
You also put on one of the piyas mann.
the bay of piyas.
Now there are two men.
Or two men too.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
Now they're going to have to pay for it.
I'm going to do a good job of it.
The bottle of people who make the best of tomorrow's birthdays.
Jidi moneyfe epi epi
Yo lage bef lobat
Yo lage bèl an bèl tirepout
It's a good idea to have a little bit of money.
I'm going to run away.
They're too small.
It's not like that.
There are many brothers and sisters who are like this.
We all suffer from the same problem.
It's all about patience.
It's all part of the theme.
It is all part of the new world.
No cash can be separated from the money, and no money can be withdrawn from the money.
I'm going to remove the disk so I'm not going to be able to remove the disk.
I'm going to shoot the prints.
There's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
Mèt Gadya and won 5 gold medals for the event.
That's because they can't do anything wrong.
Only because your body is full of blood.
It's time to celebrate and celebrate.
I'm even going to shoot him.
I know what you're talking about.
Check the tabs.
It's not just a matter of getting it right.
If you don't mind, why don't you tell me?
When I want to be with you, I want to be with you.
I don't know if I've met a foreigner before or if I know you.
with the weight of the movement.
Pouke kote or li pou yon zengou.
I'm going to have to wait until then.
I'm going back to the drawing board.
In the meantime, we're back to the drawing board.
I'm sure you'll be able to find a way to connect with someone else or something.
There are other things that will happen.
In front of my chief, I know you're too bad.
I was baptized and baptized.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
They know how to do it.
Why can't he come?
I have fought a great battle.
Pa gen patis m nanm bankawòpè
Or I'm going to call my dad but I'm going to stick to the stick.
I'm going to tell you something.
Good yo di m thus gen an an an ba a kikòn
I'll tell you how to explain it.
But it's not the same person.
I'm with you on the other side of the fence and I'm going to run your ass off.
And while I'm at it, I'm at it.
On the one who patizan yo ta run your beef
They will run away from your beef and make a lot of money.
In the case of men fighting to, disorders of men, disorders of gout, men wi, an, se lovely mon, yes!
There are 2 beef cattle left.
I'm going to put you in my shoes, I'm going to put you in my shoes, I'm going to put you in my shoes, I'm going to put you in my shoes, I'm going to put you in my shoes, I'm going to put you in my shoes, I'm going to put you in my shoes, I'm going to put you in my shoes, I'm going to put you in my shoes, I'm going to put you in my shoes, I'm going to put you in my shoes, I'm going to
If you don't have a patience, I'm going to give you a chance.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
I'm going to tell you a story.
Yo katou yo an babaton
I'm going to die too.
It's what they do.
The men of Yon Besod yo
I've lost a lot of weight.
I can't wait to get back to work and I'm so happy.
This is the defense of Lan.
La, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la,
I'm going to give you a little bit of advice or a little bit of advice.
I'm going to kill you.
I'm going to tell you a story.
of gre se tou
I've been waiting for you.
Omen, de, e pa ti negla, you know the tone of the press.
I know me, son of a bitch, and I'm not a bitch.
K ap gannon, iv tou men, sonè i kon, you negla.
It's not like the machines aren't there.
I'm going to take a look at it in a nutshell.
We're going to have to take a step back and take a step back.
We're going to have an opportunity to take it with us.
Knowing that there's no such thing as a free lunch is all that matters.
Don't get me started on this one.
Don't let me down, I'm on my way.
We've got a lot of things going on.
I'm not going to lie.
They are divided into four parts.
It's a three-way tie for first place.
I'm also a man of the people.
They said to the men who had returned to me.
I'm not sure what to do with my life.
I'm going to be the only one who can come right now.
It's the only thing I've ever seen.
They're rapping and taking it easy.
While they're rapping, they're rapping.
They gave me money in a penny.
I'm going to borrow your money.
Money is a penny.
It's a different kind of time.
I've been working on a machine that's not working for me.
They're new to me.
Li chanp or peye m
Or take a candle at other times.
or even m
I don't know who I am.
It is the same as the seven-pointed star.
I don't want to be a cowboy.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it.
I don't want to give you money to get rid of the cattle.
I'm going to leave the beef and I'm going to leave the beef and I'm going to leave the beef and I'm going to leave the beef and I'm going to leave the beef and I'm going to leave the beef and I'm going to leave the beef and I'm going to go to the beef and I'm going to go to the beef and I'm going to the beef and I'm going to go to the beef and I'm going to the beef and I'm going to
The tone of the battle is similar to that of a chegout mouchefou.
Now an gra, what are you going to do with the gra?
And perhaps even more so.
They can't fight each other.
You don't have to be a human being.
soy or samou
And then there's the samou.
How do you know what's going on?
There are several ways in which you can take it.
I'll take you with me.
I'm going to take you to the bathroom.
It's a man's way of life.
How long have we been in contact?
I'm going to sign, I'm going to sign, I'm going to sign, I'm going to sign, I'm going to sign, I'm going to sign, I'm going to sign, I'm going to sign, I'm going to sign, I'm going to sign, I'm going to sign, I'm going to sign, I'm going to sign, I'm going to sign, I'm going to sign, I'm going to sign, I'm going to sign, I'm going to sign,
It's a good thing you're here.
or dejan antò
I don't want to spend 5 bucks like that for 25 bucks like anyone else.
I'm going to play with the Indians.
The people are very happy with the results and they are happy with the results.
You are truly an enemy of the men of the garrison before you even get to the point where you can't do anything like that.
Take 5 drops of the same for the same or the same.
They don't even take the beef as much as they do.
Or two of them.
I've been drinking a lot of wine and I've been buying a lot of men's drinks.
I don't want to do this one thing.
I'll be with you soon.
I'm not going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you
A brief point of understanding.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to keep up with you, but I'm not going to be able to keep up with you.
Turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around, turn around,
M ap fwon chan kre
m ap fwon chan
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
It's not just me, it's you, it's me.
Send me the message.
It's a great way to get to know each other.
It makes you feel good.
For the good of the road.
I feel like I'm feeling like I'm not feeling like I'm feeling like I'm not feeling like I'm feeling like I'm not feeling like I'm feeling like I'm not feeling like I'm not feeling like I'm feeling like I'm not feeling like I'm feeling like I'm not feeling like I'm not feeling like I'm feeling like I'm not feeling like I'm not feeling like I'm not feeling like I'm not feeling like I'm not feeling like I'm not feeling like I'm not
The wife of the man you are looking for.
When I was younger, I wanted to be a man.
I'm going to tell you about the Nazis, and I'm going to tell you about them.
I don't have a bond with him.
When the doctor is good, he is good.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to do that.
I'm very happy with it.
That's where I'm coming from.
Akon kite me an an and gravity ansan
There is also a serious part of it.
It's also a very serious problem.
An ti gravi ta Ak lè chival to m
It's just a matter of time before it's too late.
M di chival
I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it back home.
The brick-and-mortar store was built for 10 dollars.
All the people who have been arrested have been sentenced to death by hanging.
I don't want to talk to anyone else.
You have to take care of yourself.
I'm going to tell you the truth.
Or you may be able to speak in the presence of other people or in the presence of other animals.
How do you know what to do with a vape man?
Well, did you hear me?
For the party of ray for li, for the party of l..
Owe, or men t palen men, or men t palen men t al don mien.
Or to party for the horse.
I'm looking forward to it.
I need to get out of here.
They're either dead or alive.
When the sun shines, the lamp is lit.
I can't wait to get started.
I can't help but wonder.
During the moment I plen epi epi epi
I'm going to be a child prodigy.
Or you can follow them.
Or a horse I'd like to ride.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
You are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you are the horse and you
I'm going to take care of my mother.
It is possible that I will die as soon as possible.
American horses and ponies can take pills with them.
I'll see if I can get my kids to marry me.
A postcard for the grandmother.
Empi or tout tab sivey l
to remove the banann from the skin.
That's the way it is.
For the first time in my life, I've been banned.
It's all about the skin and the skin.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
The bandan l pwokou retired l in pye l kanmen m
If you want to retire, retire.
I'm the one who's running.
I don't know who they are.
It's not about people.
Do you think it's time to retire your grandparents?
The very moment I was born.
They were born on the same day.
I'm going to retire.
It's not a big deal, but it's a big deal.
The men were the same person I met at the time of my retirement.
What's the big deal?
Se long, e se long te w granye.
This is the sixth time this has happened.
I've got a sixth teaspoon in my pocket.
Or I'm going to put it down.
Because I'm so tired of being on horseback, I'm so tired of being on horseback.
I can't wait to get back to where I am right now.
For the sake of clarity, let's say you're a man.
Or at the very least, the horse's grandfather.
If a horse is a horse, if it is a beef, if it is an animal that eats a lot of horses, it is a lot of horses.
If the sun goes down, it's like a couch horse, a couch too, or a march.
My soul is on its way to chasing the image of the world.
You can't get in or out of the way.
Because Diabab can be a canmen m
As if they were sleeping on the couche bonen.
I'm not going to lie to you.
This is why I am so proud of you.
I've got a lot of people here.
There's a lot going on in the middle of Nvidia.
I'm not pleased.
There is no way I can lift the cat's head.
Katè dimad you move.
If I will be in your way
I knew I was going to lose weight.
You've got to stand up and be counted.
I'm going to be profitable now.
This is because I can't keep up with version 4 because it's too cellular.
It can be made from 5-6 grapes.
The men are still here.
Appears to be mainly concentrated in valentine.
I know what you're getting at, but I'm a fool.
I've been living in a cell for four years.
Se horse or banyan or pou w pral lakot
I'm going to have a short conversation with him.
Se bonon or toutan ale
I'm going to have to live with it all.
Or all of you come to a standstill.
This is a sou sou rivo yon ni kouche.
I can't wait to get started.
Because I don't have color.
It's all about living life to the fullest.
There is a difference between a horse and a horse and a horse.
And when it comes to men's health, it's not about men's health, it's about men's health.
The men of louwen horses are in the right place at the right time.
They are now everywhere.
It's not like there's a lot of white blood cells in the blood.
I'm not going to die.
A new horse or a new horse will be taken care of by such men.
The men of jeval l lage
Once again I'm falling down the stairs.
Now I'm going to make it.
They are now everywhere.
I met up with Ron Bett.
You are the only one who knows how to cook.
It's all about the grain.
Li tann tout gra ki kochon married a
Men are not now.
How do you get back to being your soul mate?
How do you know what's new?
We have no choice but to make our own choices.
how much is the effect m ap wal sal
how many times i la
What's up with that?
When I die, take di, di a, nou discope boule.
It's the only way to get rid of them.
Or put me in a cottage.
When you're married to your wife.
I can't wait to get back to the net.
What do you mean?
Don't be afraid of your wife.
He and his wife were married.
I'm not sure if it's a good idea.
I'm going to tell you a story.
And I'm sure I've seen some of the biggest problems that I've ever faced.
We can pull your elbows or your eyebrows.
I want to shine my light on you.
I'm going to take a look at it.
In order to get the most out of it, we'll have to make a few more packs of it.
I was able to do a month's work in a genigank boze.
And now we're going to get rid of the horse.
I'm going to tell you something.
Isn't that a beautiful turret that's going to make you feel better every time?
I'm retired.
Do you think I'm going to be able to help you?
They can be gay from the men around you.
There's no way I'm going to be able to figure out what's going on.
What I'm doing right now I'm doing.
It's not like I'm going to be able to get my hands on it.
What am I doing now?
You will not be able to retire.
I can't wait to get back to work again.
When I walk into a room with people, I feel like I'm going to make a mess of it.
Or ban it.
It's not like they're going to kill you.
Yea good kounmen horse yon pa t before
Men are riding one pa t before
And then there's the party.
What do you think about it?
There's a lot of work to be done.
There's no such thing as a goal.
I'm going to tell you.
Or the value of a horse
I'm going to tell you something else.
Or put it here.
You've got a lot of salt.
Or put the salt in it.
or set of a
Men are gandis men are gandis
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
Now I don't want to talk about listening to you because I'm too busy.
When you're in a room, you're in a position to stand or stand alone.
Sandle pa se yo de nou yo pa wipede sa
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it to your cell.
Yo pa latte chival
Let the chival nou
I'm going to kill you.
I'm not a wokipe 2, I'm not a horse.
If you want to do this elsewhere, because the horse is a lanmal?
But, what if you know where I'm going?
I've known you since I was a kid, and I've known you since I was a kid.
I know how to draw a horse.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to pull it off.
If I'm going to do the same thing I'm going to do the same thing.
Take it or leave it.
Or at least we're not alone.
There is no one to come to you.
La men, n ap palè sou cheval la, e commonm faire vinman cheval?
What to do with wineman horse
It's the first time I've ever been to work.
I don't know how many times I'm going to be able to get my money's worth on my own.
You can deposit it at home.
Men can say a
I want to buy a horse.
for the great Kandolè w met lan pochowal lan mache
Waitin' on the horse for a candle.
Wachte team yo makout ba
Select the epi epi and make it easy.
I've met many people and I'm very proud of them.
It is possible for a horse to ride a horse in the same way as a horse.
I feel sorry for them.
I'm in the middle of something and I'm in the middle of something.
It's either coffee or horse riding.
The men on the horse came to me at the end of the day.
They will be able to bear children.
If I could buy it, I would buy it.
I'm going to know how or what to do if I'm going to be able to do it until then.
I've been waiting for you to come up with something new.
They're crazy about it.
Since then, I've been on the other side of the fence.
Take it all the way to the bottom.
It's all in the name of Wobann.
I've been salting since I was a kid.
Li drape in two pockets I pochou coast for one year
I've been waiting for you all the time.
I can't wait to fill you in.
In order to fill the void, you must fill the void.
If I could do it again, I'd do it again, and I'd do it again, and I'd do it again, and I'd do it again, and I'd do it again, and I'd do it again, and I'd do it again, and I'd do it again, and I'd do it again, and I'd do it again, and I'd do it again, and I'd do it again, and I'd do it again, and I'd do it again, and I'd do it again,
I'm going to ride my horse for a mile.
I can't put my finger on it because it's new.
to take care of her.
I can't wait to get away from it all.
Or to make room for your vacation.
How do they compare to each other?
I'm going to do the same thing again.
I've known him since I was a kid.
I can't wait to see what you're up to.
You are the same as L..
I'm going to have to go through the same rounds of screening.
I'm going to have to do two things.
I got up early.
It's a two-way street.
Bon mèske kwazman or pikalite pou lè
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
If you ask me, I won't be able to make a good horseball.
Bon cheval manbri
You're behind someone's mother's back, and you can't even wash your face.
Bye so prepareye horse or byen levafe l
The quality of the product is such that it can also be used in the kitchen.
I can't believe that I'm going to be a big fan.
I'm sure you'll be able to get a hold of me.
For me, I have a good poultry poultry and a good horse poultry poultry.
I could ride a horse like that.
Do you, do you have the condition that you respect the horse, the parisian and the poultry.
Se moun mancheval
I'm going to tell you about the horse.
Is there a competitor who wins the cup?
the conditions under which they can be prosecuted.
A horse will ride with a horse on it.
When I was riding a horse in the sea, I told him I was going to go back to the lake, and he said, "I'm going to go back to the lake".
I'm ready to do my best, and I'm ready to do my best.
Men on horseback have been killed.
It's free and open to the public.
There are many ways to improve the quality of life and healthcare.
Where can I get a horse or a horse?
Dipil Mary Bòt lari or great tochou horse la
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it or not, but I'm sure I'm going to be able to make it.
They're going to kill you.
Love is a horse's mouth or a full month's worth of food.
An, bon, men or pa konn mande kob pou zan to the horse lari gen.
Please give me the milk, wap bay gen.
2 se do la pou until l wawenn se 2 do la yo until the horse la pou bourik la
They won't be able to fly on their own or make a young horse ride on their own.
I can finally get the young horse.
Or go out with it to the horse's mouth.
If I can't do it myself, even if I have three months to live, I can do it myself.
I can't wait to see what you've got in store for me.
Or maybe I'll never see him again.
I've been here for a few months now.
They're on horseback.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it for a while.
They can also be filled for miles and miles.
I've been here for a few years now.
They're in front of a lot of people.
Since I've been there, I've been behind longanman.
I can't wait for the next one.
I've been listening to a lot of people.
Mann o li parive sou lou
I'm sure you'll be able to get your hands on it before it's too late.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
or ban me.
Gwen men may often enbett with fries when they are completely surrounded or banished.
If I'm going to do this, I'm going to do it all over again or I'm going to do it all over again.
I know what you're talking about.
Now is the time to make sure that the wine is available on a monthly basis.
What do you do with it?
Every month, every month, every month, every month.
or by kite chepik tanko
It's not like I'm going to be a fan of vanko.
or for the occripo de lou pa pa per zil
I've met the code before and I'm ready for it.
I want you to know that I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here, I'm here,
He is also the son of Li.
The convimentan li can produce lemons of up to 1 and up to 12 males of up to 12 females.
I'm doing the same thing to you.
I'm the first person in the world to know everything.
He was the first child of the whole family.
I'm going to tell you all about it, and I'm going to tell you all about it.
I can't wait to see what happens next.
I can't wait to see what's in store for me.
I'm going to buy a new one.
Sitalin and Pare today a la
I want to know how long it's going to last.
I've been waiting for you to come up with something new.
It takes a month to complete the process and a month to complete the process.
If I'm full and I'll be controlling the chak lalin for a month.
It is planned to be completed in a month.
Twelve lalin can be found in the meantime.
There are fourteen of them.
If I don't take the money, does it matter if the money is going to make a profit on my money?
Well, that's not the point.
I'm sure you'll be able to use it well until the end of the day.
I'm good at it.
I'm going to try to find a way out of it.
chon an lòt
It's a lot more than that.
He is my Lord, my Lord.
Now is the time for me to go to Woben.
I'm going to tell you about Dibonya.
It's not just me, it's you.
You will know God.
A copy of the sign.
Se vi men ban you.
Yo rayayaj Eri m da potibo the Lord may choose jive yon yon yon soy epigi La bèm a rive o pranasyonam with ismael
Gese Genje suzanen dò
Let's get to the bottom of it.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you, I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you, and I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you.
It's not like I'm going to let you down.
The men in his parts were very poor.
I'm not even sure if I'm going to make a mistake.
Chak le l ap peche kribich
I can't wait to be with you now.
It's a short walk from the city centre to the city centre.
They made a second run in the first innings of the match.
Even the third floor passes along with the elephant.
They're going to have to go to the bathroom.
There is no doubt that this is the case for Wontin.
To kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, to kill the rich, and to kill the poor.
I'm sure you'll be able to find a way to fix it.
When you're a beast, you can't take the elephant in the room.
When it comes down to it.
They found a nice car in front of their house.
It's all in the house.
Drink and drink.
It's your birthday.
You're not going to be able to keep up with me.
I'll give you the key.
It's like they're doing this kind of thing.
I'm going to try to make it up to you.
I'm sure you'll be able to find out if you've ever been there before.
The lady is the same as me.
They were so excited and excited to be able to do so.
You are far away from the Father.
We can't afford to lose weight.
I'm glad you're doing the same thing.
We can't even have a big lady on the podium.
Okay, madam, how are you?
Yes, I'll get back to you, madam, but I'll take the key, or I'll take the key.
You'll see what's going on.
Li se se yon ti kolev kandal run closed
You're going to have the same problem.
They don't want to be tied up again, and I don't want to give them money.
Oh, you're the one I'm with.
And you can say something good about Vadan before you start falling.
Two pots of potatoes can be found here.
There are two types of epileptic seizures.
I can't wait to see it.
You won't win.
You're not in my shoes.
They won't let you out.
They won't be able to make it when Louvelin Joun and I come to the door.
I'm going to buy Won.
You're in my shoes.
You won't be able to find the right people.
I'm sure they'll all be there for you.
You've got to be careful.
Nouot bagou t ap bay and Mwen
I want to sing for you, I want to sing for you, I want to sing for you, I want to sing for you, I want to sing for you, I want to sing for you, I want to sing for you, I want to sing for you, I want to sing for you, I want to sing for you, I want to sing for you, I want to sing for you, I want to sing for you, I want to sing for you, I want to sing for you, I want to sing for you, I want to sing for you, I want to sing for you,
I'm going to sing you a song.
The song is sung by Moun.
When a person has a conspiracy to clear his mind of a crime he has committed.
can nou pa chak jou is the leader of the verlèy jou
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
I've always had a lot of fun with it.
When I was a kid, Pouk lemiz la riben
You're not going to be able to add anything.
Nou zanmen kòb
Tandan lternite sol lakès tipas la ajout
I've been waiting for you lately.
I've never been to Rome before.
I've always wanted to go to Rome.
Chan Chan Sanke de san goute is the name of the game.
Nou zanthand manchamèl la glòm
I'm going to try to get a glimpse of it.
I'm going to channel the world.
I can't wait to get behind the scenes of Jesus.
I can sing Iwagay.
I'm here to tell you that I'm not a fan of you, but I'm a fan of you.
You can't even use it.
Now you're going to be fine.
Some of the men who were there were very happy with my grandfather's work.
Loubli, well raswil great members, not kanmou nou cherab li lotan an, two lavi l lamòv, an di an sanvi an sanvi an sanman.
If I'm going to do the same thing, I'm going to do the same thing, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, I
I let the maschans pass and threw away my peel, but the Librans dral lade jen dral, lavi kontinou, je me suis plou malye.
In paradise, there is a statue of me, and Solomon will be full again, angel, angel, angel, angel as I am.
Kouto and lostyal
The ecoudechon de lalourèt is located here.
I don't want to be paid.
It will be restored to its former glory.
Yes, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am, I am not, I am not, I am not, I am not, I am not, I am not, I am not, I am not, I am not, I am not, I am not, I am not, I am not, I am not, I am not, I am not,
There is no such thing as an anti-anxiety disorder.
I'm a fan of an antenna bonye.
It's a dream come true for you.
rapper of the same name.
I'm sure you'll like it.
What do you think of me?
Ekoute gouten la, ekoute chote la, lou rèt.
Ankwen Zouzyel, the living and the dead.
I'm not sure if it's a dance or not.
There is no such thing as a metaphorical metaphor.
I'm always on the loose.
As an adult, typhus is retained.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to tell you three times.
But typhus has never been this old.
I'm going to live my life.
I'm going to tell you three things.
It's the only thing I've ever seen.
So if you come here to talk to me about it, if you don't talk to me about it, I'll kill you.
I'm sure you'll know where I'm coming from.
I'm going to eat it.
I'm going to try to get rid of it.
Yon with yon grenn kri bich
What's the matter with you?
They're coming to talk to me if I'm going to talk to them.
I'm going to kill L..
And when you get there, take your bout trip to the island, and find them with a crab mate.
That's why I'm so proud of my grandparents.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
It's going to be such a good crab tree to trip me to the loun.
Compete in the demands of the ring can be used to make the tick and the epi.
The company's requirements cannot be met.
Do you know how to do it?
You can make it easy for them.
It is derived from the name of the bay.
This is the result of Manan di Koumèy's rise to power.
They say they're going to get the hell out of here.
We know a lot about Maridam.
I was surprised to see her run away.
I ran a long way to get to the Kribich shop.
Krièbich, did he or she even buy a bottle of water?
The Kopek Division is a self-contained unit that has been around for a long time.
They're back with a copy of it.
They are of Coptic origin.
Do you or even do you have a long-standing relationship with Maridam?
I am not a member of the various corporal divisions of the Maritime Division.
I'm not going to be able to make it back with a copy of it.
Do you know if or even if you are a member of the various corporal divisions of the Maritime Division?
I've seen a lot of TV shows, but I'm not sure.
It's not for me to say that I'm a better person than Mary.
The caboral division of the Marite
This is the division.
The evin and the cumè crab di
You are my own self.
It's a bit more of a mystery than Mary's.
Li Fobra can be found here.
Do you want to eat a copy of the cream of the crop?
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to keep up with my routine.
I don't want to give you a copy of the cream of the crop.
This is typical of a married couple.
I've been waiting for you for a long time.
The head of the division is the member of the division.
Yes, I'm going to fall.
I'm with you.
I'm the guy who knows his stuff.
Menita knew her first wife.
If his wife died, he would die.
I took my children and brought them to the brethren.
The men reluctantly put on a pair of shoes.
I don't know what to wear.
I've got a lot of people in my life right now.
They laughed, they laughed, they laughed.
Chak jou leni
They planted grenzorè man
There's a lot more to life than that.
You've got a lot of weight and a lot of life.
You're the sweetest man on your mother's side.
You're going to lose your man Li.
They're still two years old.
What is the meaning of zwan anmi?
Listen to li ponz or bring li yon
They've got a lot to say.
Listen to what they are saying.
They brought them to beautiful men.
They've got a lot of taste in them.
You've got a mouth full and a mouth full and a mouth full and a mouth full.
In fact, they've been peeling and laying their hands on them for a long time.
It's the same thing that happens to you.
When they come out of the closet, they have a chance to get their hands on something special.
Are you going to put a man up?
You've got a man up your ass.
You've got a lot of men up your sleeve.
You've got a man in your mouth.
There is also a menmoutette.
You're a man and you're a man and you're a man.
It's not easy being green.
Ap up the la
I'm going to go upstairs and read it.
My dad and I are coming.
Daddy atande li sing l ap sing men l
Dad has two pizwa.
The man stood up, and the handsome man stood up.
You've heard it and you've heard it.
You've heard it all before.
Beautiful men are here.
My dad told me what to do next.
My dad is going to die.
Because I can't afford to lose.
I've lost a lot of energy.
I'm falling down here.
It's like I'm in the middle of nowhere.
There are two kinds of people who want to do something.
You're not going to be able to do anything new.
or pa ben take care of you
You can treat this person with caution.
It's not like I don't want to be in a chapel anymore.
Do you still have some consistency or are you Bouki?
No, Bouki doesn't know what to say, well, he doesn't help anyone.
When the penal bouki von lòy an
I don't know who you are, but I know who you are.
Bouki can't be bothered.
Bouki is not a peyote.
Bouki is holding on.
I don't believe in this book.
Randan tou ral la pou
This is the only way I can help you with your mission.
M-pa, what's your name?
mounche w manno
I've been watching a lot of TV shows.
The men of sanvare begin the men of tou
This book is about potatoes.
It's been a while since I've been able to get back on track, and I'm so happy to be back on track.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm going to be back.
They're coming back.
Anonymous passes through the table.
Dad, good to hear you.
I've been through it.
I'm wondering what I'm going to do next.
It's the end of the day.
I'm going back out there.
And by God's grace, I've come back to you and I don't know what a carriage is.
There is nothing that God can do for you.
This is about God's grace.
They are also known as Mese too.
What's the matter with you?
You guys are rappers, aren't you?
I don't want to see you again.
I'm finite and I'm bound to you.
You're going to be a slave.
I'm finite ten and I'm bound to you.
I'm a slave to you.
Chen gade an such
Or not at all.
I'm looking forward to it.
It's not a big deal.
It's a book I'm going to tell you.
I'm going to give you a little bit of advice.
I'm sure you'll find a lot more.
One of the accomplices came to me.
One of the camp's accomplices is more than one.
One cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow, one cow,
E vi Males ale Sou dou bef la yon mwen sou dou bef la yo tanpe
I'm going to make someone happy if you're here.
E, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you
Now I'm ready to let you know that Malis is coming.
Malis steale beef la
Malis arelman lives with his family.
They're all the same now.
There is no such thing as a free lunch, and there is no such thing as a free lunch.
The men of my coast make up all the cost of my coast, please.
Yes, you can come here.
You've made several attempts to find the cattle and the palms.
Whoever has the right to a fair trial for the person who takes the beef.
Men, li renvi, li everyone in the phone rasanbleman.
When you come, everyone is invited.
I'm going to have to wait for the next wine.
I'm going to take you to Maliz Vini
I'm going to take you to Maliz Vini
Yo te touk maliz vini
Boukidi and Ben Mouchè are going to come to you and you're going to have a good time.
It's not like you're going to make a mistake.
It's not like I'm going to be able to keep up with you.
There are a lot of people out there who don't like books.
I'm sure you'll be able to find out.
I already know that I'm going to win the festival of la kanmen.
No men can or can't.
Gen on costim and m
Ap on the coast of the met
They don't have to.
It's a continuation of what I've been told, because I've been told that I'm a good person.
It's going to be my birthday.
I don't want to give up.
You're a real man, you've got a lot to do with your life.
The ban was lifted.
I have a good feeling about you.
Mwen mwen te or al anman metou on chemiz
They gave me a gift for my children.
They're a huge fan of books and magazines.
One can't even afford to lose weight.
I'm going to fish with the bookies I've got for you.
It's called bouki.
They're like this.
This is the book of the book of pran.
It's my birthday and it's my birthday.
All the guys are coming.
You can even put on your own.
The same goes for the costumes of Den Malis di Eee
I can't wait to get a good look at it.
Fòm moutou an chante
Or to sing at the birthday party.
Bouki di Men is one of them.
I've heard two rasanble phones.
The hearing loss of the person pleased me.
We're not going to take it anymore.
I'm not going to give up on it.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
It's time for you to get back to me.
I've lost my joy, I've lost my joy, I've lost my joy, I've lost my joy, I've lost my joy, I've lost my joy, I've lost my joy, I've lost my joy, I've lost my joy, I've lost my joy.
My wife Njon Nibon is on a quest for a man.
I think I can do this for you.
I want to do something with Jesus.
Do something with Jesus.
There are two ways to do this.
They say this is a two-dimensional world.
Vwen bon up in front of you
I can't wait to get my hands on someone else.
Put up the men in my living room.
It's going to happen to everyone, and it's going to happen to everyone.
Egypt will take my beef.
Malesri took the beef and made it for them.
I can't wait to get started.
I can't wait to book seven of the ten plans.
I didn't get to it.
They called it Bouki.
Bouki mande Bouki
Malis gen tan rive
moun k ap led a a
They called it Bouki
Do you know how Bouki sings?
Everything about me will be heard and I will sing.
Ever since it appeared, everything has come to a standstill.
They can see the beef.
We're going to do something about it.
They say they're a
The video will appear.
Mechedav and his family were alone.
Say it or say it again.
It's the way you're supposed to be.
All of the bougie bwaj chante
I'm going to tell you a secret.
Mwen tando w ap fonrach anbyen
Then I lost my bon plizi
Don't worry about it.
It's also very good.
I'm going to do this again.
I did it again.
I've been waiting for you to leave me alone.
I'm not going to say what I'm going to do about it.
I'm not going to take it anymore.
You're the only one who knows.
I'm looking forward to seeing you again.
I'm here to help you.
I made a bourgeois chade of one last franchisee.
You are a good man.
The feast at the end of the feast of menmi
Yo ale yo tanpe
I'm going to ban the book.
I'm going to try to get some jess.
You don't have a phone.
This is why you don't have a phone.
This is the epic story.
I'm a man of my dreams.
I've been waiting for you.
You don't have to do that.
Take the risk of not knowing what to do with it.
Men run away from the people who come to them.
People are coming now and they're going to be fine.
While Satan is on the lookout for each and every one of us, he is on the lookout for us.
On the foot of the cliff
Those who come may be able to generate a large amount of energy by using it.
You don't have to worry about it.
You have to come to your own country to make a decision.
Panam ekoujè souvon t ap pran repou a bay behind the front.
Li di menmen, malgetou chapa maye, because, yes, jabri kounmi fell, m ap fault mwen jou.
If there are other bandits, or if they want me to die, they're going to kill me, they're going to kill me, they're going to kill me now.
Yeah, Chami, okay, I'm all about you, phase one.
I'm all about you.
I'm going to make you a pot of salt.
It's all in your head, it's all in your head.
I've been looking for a great man for a long time.
If you're going to get it right, you're going to get it right.
I'm not sure how long I'm going to be able to keep my head up.
May the people of Zion be able to do their work.
Ankon is a man of many talents and a man of many talents.
or press m pap de chanv
I'm with you too.
That's what you're going to do with your hair.
Yon yon M Kodas mou bye wouk t ap mout wè yon kodas
I'm not going to put up with a lot of other people.
How many codes can I learn?
I've been wanting to go to the bathroom for a while.
There are two languages and two codes that can be used to describe Kou an kon.
I can't wait to get to know you.
How can you do it?
I'm in the mood for three more.
You're the voice of the world.
Good job and pass my last shortcut chief you've seen I've seen the shortcut li
He's the chief.
Hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
You're in the middle of it.
I'm going to go with you.
I've got a lot going on here.
Let's get to the bottom of it.
I don't want to give up on my boss.
I'm going to give it to you.
They'll take care of you.
I'll give you a break.
Li m ap chèm fin mout or tout kou.
Go to the moutye louk short mout a
The ruler of the people is not a wpil nou
They're going to take everything they've got.
We're going to have to figure out how we're going to do it.
I'm sorry about the way you're doing it.
I'm not sure how I'm going to do it.
People trade with menay la
I'm sorry, but I'm not sorry.
There are eight grays and I'm Cheri from Ayivon or nearby.
The law is based on the law of the land and the laws of the land.
I've been waiting a long time.
It's the same with men and women.
And then there's the story.
Men and women are looking for a place to stay.
It's not like I'm a farmer.
It's hard to say for sure.
I'm going to use the device.
Ap mwen under chapo ab souye ban moun.
He is the chief executive officer of Chapo ou.
Or they're going to fall down.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that anymore, but I'm sure I'm going to be able to do that.
I don't want to do that even under Chapo.
The members of the gallek w ap sou sou li konnyan
God is in control of the world.
It's a good thing you're here.
It's just a matter of time before it's too dark.
Wap mwen w farm baye sa
Emenay mwen is a grill of epi w or li achta w pen
I'm going to the grill to eat a man.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Negra and black are not allowed to do so.
There is no such thing as a cowardly man.
This is a man-made phenomenon.
I fell down and cried.
I was crying.
The father of Negroes speaks the language.
Lout's not a guy.
Malge sa nègra dormiyè I
I've been waiting for you to arrive.
Kesskite wine la maman
Kessite wine is made from grapes.
My mother refused.
I filed a complaint about having all the money in my pocket.
I know what I'm going to do.
I won't buy my voice.
You're such a guy.
The guy who came out of the closet.
Men think they're derived from a trust.
Men are more expensive than men.
The price of salt is very high.
Listen to what you're saying.
I'm going to ask you a question.
They live where they want to live.
I'm doing my best right now.
The men are right now.
Don't worry about it.
They're men now.
Yo tout moun kouche
It's all about who you are.
Now I'm going to go to the bathroom and I'm going to go to the bathroom.
And that's all there is to it.
Mouche leve yo kouwouch or diyen yo jou kouwit tonm tonm nan with rèsk with kalalou a
Regardless of what happened, I'm not sure.
It's not like you're going to be able to do it.
It's like a flying saucer and a white flying saucer.
I'm going to fly to London.
The disks are then placed on the mantle of the mantle.
It's time to move on to the next big thing.
such as li trap epi epi
Li is like a trap.
I've seen a lot of people like that.
Open your mouth when you put a button on it.
Open your mouth when you're ready.
ton li trape ton li trape ton li trape
It's a ton of fun.
It's a ton of fun.
Or from a tou lou.
It's not that bad, it's just that it's not going to work.
There's no way I'm going to be able to figure out who I'm going to be.
It's not even about the single-seater.
The mouche vete a
You can't listen to a guitar or a guitar.
Listen to your brother on the guitar.
I'm going to leave you alone.
It's all in your head.
I'm going to talk to my friend.
even as a mout
There's no one else I can get in front of you.
I can't wait to see it.
I continue to write for Paul.
Neglect of the house we live in.
They say Oh
I'm going to try to make an ap of myself or someone else or someone else's apology.
The tapri is located on the ground floor.
I've been waiting for a few days.
I'm on my way.
The mother of the county's men.
I'm a big fan of this one.
And the wine at the top of the stairs is refreshing.
Now that I've had enough of wine, I'm going back to the drawing board.
Maycho wine at the level of li repone
I've been drinking wine on a small scale.
The president is not repone
It's because they're in the middle of it.
It's time for you to get back on track.
Open your eyes to those who are in the race.
I'm not going back to you.
We don't want to lose weight.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to do that.
I'm not a writer.
So, I'm going to do it with my wife, and I'm going to do it with my husband.
I'm in the mood for men.
or t ap pale
There is no such thing as a man or a woman.
It's not like you're a real man.
Mommy, or mommy, men who are like me, mommy, or mommy, men who are like me.
The men of Dibirou came to the rescue.
I can't wait to get my hands on one of these.
It is covered with a layer of lip tissue when the fluid flows.
Li decontat ouk gasonye.
That's right, that's right.
Grapefruit, a large grapefruit, is a good choice for you, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog, your dog
If you don't work for me, I'll work for you.
Man, good, man, yes, you're after my stuff for, for, yes, yes, yes.
Yamen doudou, yamen doudou, yamen doudou yo men, yo yo men yamen doudou tibou.
You guys are men.
Where am I supposed to be?
They will be able to pay more and more.
The way I look at myself is not the same as the way I look at myself.
I'm going to stay here.
Oh, I'm not going to do anything else, two seats, I'm not going to do anything else, oh, two rooms, two seats, two seats.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
toumou mwen toumou
I'm going to try to do my best.
I ran the ranp, sanm bag li beast now i.
Take the indipt and ask me, then, and so on and so forth, whether you like it or don't like it.
I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do, I don't know what to do.
Now I'm here, and I'm here, and I'm here.
Janmè, tompe, you, the people for nine times.
I'm not a woman, I'm not a man, I'm not a woman, I'm not a woman, I'm not a man, I'm not a woman, I'm not a man, I'm not a woman, I'm not a man, I'm not a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a man, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a man, I'm a woman, I'm a woman, I'm a man, I'm a woman, I'
I'm late or I'm late or I don't want to run.
I'm going to run pran karate.
The time has come for them to take up karate.
They're either going to take it or they're going to take it or they're going to take it or they're going to take it or they're going to take it or they're going to take it or they're going to take it or they're going to take it or they're going to take it or they're going to take it or they're going to take it or they're going to take it or they're going to take it or they're going to take it or they're going to take it or they're going to
I'm going to have fun with it.
Men are not moving.
There is no move san
They will move you to San
It's all about people.
Sa ou patou a
As if I could make you happy.
I'm going to tell you a story.
Sa or ta pa move san a?
You're the guy in the room.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
Don't worry or don't worry.
It's in the territory of the fache.
I'm not sure how much I'm going to do.
and swa y kòman y swa y kòman y swa y kòman y swa y kòman y swa y kòman y swa y kòman y swa y kòman y swa y kòman y swa y
Men are nonsense people.
They've got a lot to do with it.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
or network or di.
I've been waiting for you.
It's not like I'm going to be able to keep up with you.
O spwa or yon men di l
Yo fa la tayen
You're the one who knows what you're talking about.
You can buy 3 goldye barem 5 kob la.
They gave me 3 goldye barem 5 gold coins.
Tab came up with the idea of making a movie.
You don't know what you're talking about, you don't know what you're talking about, you don't know what you're talking about, you don't know what you're talking about, you don't know what you're talking about, you don't know what you're talking about, you don't know what you're talking about, you don't know what you're talking about, you don't know what you're talking about, you don't know what you're talking about.
Do you know if it's a chak dengin or if it's all about chasing after your guy?
They'll take it all when they've got it or when they've got it or when they've got it or when they've got it or when they've got it or when they've got it or when they've got it or they've got it or they've got it or they've got it or they've got it or they've got it or they've got it or they've got it or they've got it or they've got it or they've got it or they've got it or they've got it
The guy who came to me is new.
You're the guy who's got it all figured out.
I'm not going to say anything about it.
enti or tere men
You can't beat the men.
You can't beat the men.
Every man has a right to his own life.
LOUBal handles tab
While I'm on my mother's side, I'm on my mother's side.
My mother wouldn't listen to me.
Don't listen to me when I'm with your mother.
And then there's the short story.
Now you have the right to drink wine, and now you have the right to drink wine, and now you have the right to drink wine.
Lan de chirevyenn
It's not going to happen.
The wine will fall on your shoulders.
The loss of wine fell on your shoulders.
It's just one of those things.
Jan rele monmò
It's going to fall too.
There are two ways to get there.
One of the reasons for this is that I am not sure what to do with myself.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
If you're going to be a grey man, you're going to have to come back.
The entrance to the building is open to the public.
This is why we are here to help you.
Representing the Dominican Republic with open arms or will not be able to reside in the Dominican Republic.
After receiving his resignation, he left the country.
I'm sure you'll find something like that.
This is how the city is made into a city.
There is no such thing as a human being.
I'm so excited to see if I can even think about it.
His brother had arrived at the scene of the crime.
Al gwen mwen bon ante mank pral Moun
Jakasya di thus
These are the ones who have died.
Grus people are like this
If a cat is not born, it will be born dead.
It's a debate that doesn't take place.
Men should be treated with dignity like this.
They're the only ones who can do it.
Se ke weyen w ap vin appear
In this way, it generates more resistance than ramye.
They give us more resistance than Ramye.
Ramey and Ramey are more resilient than others.
That's how I feel about it.
Rame di wim has more resistance than takou
I'm going to try to make it even.
Let's not put on a baby to sing it and do the same for Rami.
They were the first to introduce Serami.
Rami starts singing I sing I sing I sing I sing I sing I di Laramye
Laramye epi thus appears.
The white wine is still appearing.
It's time to make a decision.
La ramye Nan an autre 3rd or 2nd bouchi is now onou
Ramiye appears in the form of jwo.
How to start a wine defayi
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
I've never seen anything like it before.
Takou has never been there before.
takou kòvansyab defay
takou rede isakou
This is where the epiphany will appear.
They're talking to me right now.
La rabye la laramye
It's the same with your father's pills and lagonin.
The men are pare Estakou
It's time to move on.
And I'm going to cut down a tree and I'm going to fall down the tree.
Men chak jou ramya to introduce chak fak ramya to introduce your son
Ramya still has a mouth now.
Always wear the shape of the dark li vin konkouraj m pel performan satali pou konbat
I'm already in the middle of a conversation.
I'm going to try it anyway.
They passed on their soul to Takou A.
I'm going to try to make the best of it for my grandmother, and I know I'm going to give her the best I can give you.
Don't be fooled by the fact that there is a great deal of resistance.
You're better off now
They are even now making wine on the brink of poverty.
Palm yo football ki gen isye a
Football is a good game.
It's not like we're a team or anything.
Se yon team of chwal alabriy ziliem
It prevye m ap
I'm not going to give up on you, and I'm not going to give up on you.
I'm going to tell you yes.
I'm going to release tavann tinit
Yo amfet they play right-sided
Lateral gouch vedi epi o gen
Gen o ti fanfan
Yo rele misye sa a woman krèb jwe
I'm going to re-release it.
You are releasing misye ti amalal
Now that you're a guy, my brother and I are pleased to have you as a member.
Rome and Paspa.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
Or there is a Levite who is not one of them.
No, not at all.
The door is open.
win or lose.
I'm an Elvish man.
Men are not allowed to eat or drink.
I don't want to lose you.
to win or lose.
or gen jan daniel bettoni
reime dan anjonten
They're in the middle of the trauk.
or gen jan renlem se jan daniel bettoni
Don't worry about it.
One of them is called Wendè a.
Gen yon ti gama or gen yon ti gama
or gen yon ti gama ki jou langmi attack the
I'm going to take a look.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it myself.
A cell phone broadcast is broadcast.
Everything is bound to be in a complete plan.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to keep up with the team.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
What can you do to save your life again?
This is an exciting time for the team, do you want to be a part of the club or not?
They're not going to be able to keep up with the team they're playing with.
Do you have a large team of players versus a large number of teams?
The new generation of the Azel team will be able to make a living even if it's on the road.
It's a great way to get to know each other even when you're in a hurry.
If you want to be placed as the best team in the world, you can win the cup.
Bon aprè nou vin gen ase el lapido to make you or you
They've done a great job in front of us.
There will be no more gas.
Now you know what's going on.
Now we are going to start playing the game of championship.
It's the only thing I can do.
You've made your debut in the new world.
If you miss a goal, you're going to lose.
It's not the same for two seconds.
Now you're in the mountains too.
There is no shortage of footballers.
There is no shortage of remittances for the goal.
I've also scored a golden goal.
and joute penak di
joute penak di
The first penak li choute
When the transesimal nerve is reversed, it strikes again.
The second penak di
Pre and choute ye.
La y al choute apre
Nigga dantan y al choute
Choute yo choute
I'm going to lead the Nazis.
The penalty is that the team will be punished.
Let them pass you by.
Fast guy yo yo evik w
I'm a guy who's really into you.
I am even choute 4th men al ditil li big l
I'm even choute 5th men al ditil pa yo yo li great l
Don't worry, you're not going to win.
I'm going to tell you a lot of things.
Now you can't afford to spend it on the Chinese chief, and you can't afford to spend it on the Chinese chief.
Don't worry about doing some good research.
There is no vagbe sa.
Will I be able to do it, as if I were entering the country?
They entered the country a
I won't be able to put my finger on it.
A few days later, when I arrived, I was able to put my hand on the front of the car.
I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I'm here because I
That's why you don't even know.
There are two ways to do this.
If you're not in a classroom, you can put someone in a classroom or a classroom.
Donkson is one of a series of guys who've been through it.
They don't know what to do with it.
They make it easy for people to pass on their teachings.
The men saw your cravay on your way to do it.
Men can't do the exact same thing if they do the job.
Work where you can get the job done.
Or where I'm going to be.
I can make tea again.
An adult can have sex with his or her mother or grandmother, and he or she can have sex with his or her team.
I don't know what to do with my mother.
The Negroes have done a lot of good in their football career.
Because I'm not a human being or I don't know what to do.
We're going to have a great football game.
I'm going to tell you a story.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
Put on your other and last wine.
Now you know my grandmother's coat and a box.
This is the logo of the account holder's account.
I don't know who is retranching you.
You put everything in your place.
How much new wine is there, how many 650 gold men think about it?
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it again.
Good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man, good man,
My mom and I don't want to be on the other side of the world anymore.
I don't want to be on the other side of the world.
You guys are the worst guys in the world, you guys are the worst guys in the world.
We can't afford to lose ground.
The men's team is made up of two teams.
Gen gen team masil
Men like you to win wès a
epi and control controls.
There are two presidents.
Join the women's team.
It's okay, Kennedy, and I'm going to have to deal with my mom and dad like this.
Don't worry, I'm not going to be able to do anything but love you completely.
Because they want to make a difference.
You don't know how to plant a plant.
Thirty-five minutes into the game.
I think it's because I'm in my 60s and I can't afford it.
I'm going to do them a favor.
Li Bon retired
They've been doing it for 30 years now.
They're going to make me feel good about you.
Don't be fooled by the rules.
It's such a beautiful network.
They're in your work.
They are friends of my soul.
amuse you li.
Bondonm pale bay la pral Ese Remani and placi li la Dòk where he is known as Monvin Assistant Football as a
It's a constant dive for the snow and the Brazilian football.
One day I'm going to fall into the same team.
If only I myself had been to the Tiber valley.
Even if they don't have the time to do anything, they work.
Man, I'm going to fall.
Or when a man sees me fall into the hands of a man, he can say, "What kind of man?"
Now, if you don't like it, don't take your stuff.
Yes, it's a team game.
Collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar, collar.
E katiswa definye.
The men are in their second position in the playoffs.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
Gen mwen anitit nou men
It's the same as the old one, and it's the same as the old one.
Jan mwen is a composer of a
If I'm going to play football, I'm going to play football.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be a good fit.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
I can't wait to meet you or stand in front of someone's door.
This is what the team has done before.
The two teams made a double-edged mine in the form of Chabemenn.
Li chwon m football la
Li chwon dwo soccer premen soccer li jwase with tobek bat li ennaze ou
The men are going to land or I'm going to bat or I'm going to land.
Or to make a Bon.
They are wines of equal value.
Li wine is made with epi Wondel or kay la.
I'm on the same page.
A la pou
the second mitran
Since then, they have won a gold medal.
I scored a goal on a coufran.
Let's not be the one who scored the goal in Kalin.
I've been playing golf for a few decades now, and I'm very proud of it.
Li gen wè yon Kalin nan swa kalin
It's the first time that I've ever been in a situation like this.
The men are going to be jacked up and taken to the police station.
The men who have stood in defence of the country have passed away.
It's the kind of man who's always wanted to be with someone who's always wanted to be with someone who's always wanted to be with you.
If they are mixed together, they will be able to eat the same food.
Ever since I've scored a goal, I've been able to hold on to it.
I've got people on the floor.
with one side of the letapye
with a sense of urgency.
Yon del ennazye is located in wiskansion.
They're going to beat me to the punch.
to drink the wine, to drink the wine, to drink the wine, to drink the wine, to drink the wine, to drink the wine, to drink the wine, to drink the wine, to drink the wine, to drink the wine, to drink the wine, to drink the wine, to drink the wine, to drink the wine, to drink the wine, to drink the wine, to drink the wine, to drink the wine, to drink the wine.
They'll be there, they'll be there, they'll be there, they'll be there, they'll be there, they'll be there, they'll be there, they'll be there, they'll be there, they'll be there, they'll be there, they'll be there, they'll be there, they'll be there, they'll be there, they'll be there, they'll be there, they'll be there, they'll be there, they'll be there, they'll be there.
They're even going to bat on the weekend.
I'm living in a world where there's nothing wrong.
or bat dwonk bac las
I'm living in a new world and I'm living in a new world.
Don't be fooled by it.
I live in a world where I'm not alone.
There is a great ban on l..
Ladwòs Fòt Ebonkaza is located in Ebonkaza.
You don't have to wait until you're ready to make a match.
A foot in the door of Porto.
Who's going to make the team?
The team is new to the team.
Who is the new player to choose?
If you want to make a new move together, you want to make a new move together.
Gen m katio or lan libe or a
Renol pa t banm manti in Gadyen an
I don't know how many people I'm going to be able to put together.
There's a lot of laziness.
We're not going to be able to stop you from scoring a goal.
Some zayi team men's selection Oh
Reba national team selection yo reba
The team said it's okay.
I'm going to tell you a few things.
If there are 10 of them, then there are only 10 of them.
Do you know how many times I've been there?
I haven't read it yet.
I don't want to take your soul.
They are facing problems.
Every single one of them has a problem with it.
Make a mark of 2 with n
Men can't afford to be poor without leading their own lives.
I'm not going to let you get away with it.
Divin lead you to li
I'm not going anywhere near the end of the day.
Poul ti m for bout bay 2 goals
The goal is scored every single time.
I've scored 2 goals and it's not easy.
A vacancy for the two teams will be filled by the Lord of the Rings.
Good to hear that.
I'm not thinking about it.
Or you'll take the Bewòv team.
To lead me with the Aysen national team.
I'm not a big fan of it.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
This is why I'm going to legalize it.
They don't tell me what they know.
If I were a man, I'd have to leave myself alone because I'd been in big trouble.
Section of the cellulose in a bowl can be done in 5-6 hours at a time.
Se bay seri men, from standing up in the country, from making your club, to standing up for you.
You're going to have to live with the consequences.
I'm going to take a picture of my life.
I'm not sure what to do here.
This is one of the most important activities of the day.
It's the same here.
It's time to get back to work.
Everything will work.
A good man at work.
I'm not the only one who can do that.
and all the work.
I'm not going to lie to you.
I'm going to do the same thing.
I want to do all the work.
I'm going to go back to school.
The cost of living is the same as the cost of living.
Listen or get out OK?
I'm in the middle of a gold rush to get out of here, and I don't want to get out of here, do I?
Kouran, kouran wakay l la tout à tous?
Yeah, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I
You're the only one who can do it.
Men who are close to the Qur'an
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything.
Is there a man beside the Qur'an?
Who's your boss?
I'm going to take a break from my job or my mommy's.
I'm going to give you some advice.
It's not like we're going to get any milk.
Who can pull you off?
No one can give you anything.
I've got the charts, the charts, the men.
If you want to take a picture of a card, I'll ask you to explain it to me.
It's like a card.
One of them is to serve a chaye a.
They can read it all.
There are four men for gas plike yon
I can tell you how to do it.
I can tell you.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
Some people will make you feel like you're going to die.
There is no limit to the genome.
Li gen bayas karase wa se reba la
That's the way it is.
With a good mileage, is a card on a purse worth a fortune?
charèt ap bourèt
What can I say if I give you a briefcase on a card?
Isn't that a good idea?
A scholarship is awarded to a chartered accountant.
or desaj va mal or desaj va mal
Or disaj wa mal man
That's why I'm here.
You can get a fresh look at the world around you.
I know how much I'm going to be able to get out of it.
Li san willye
Anbo zipay yo and nan sa toumol
There are two ways to take epi.
A man who takes his own soul away from the world is forbidden to do so.
It's underneath the tree.
I'm not going to ban you.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
I know where you're coming from.
So I'm going to take care of all my protogressions.
I don't know who you are, but I know who you are.
I'm not going to tell you.
They're going to take a look at you and you're going to take a look at them.
Where do you take your soul and put it in your heart?
Don't take your breath away.
They're going to have to do it all over again.
They are taken from you.
It's the only thing I've ever seen.
M pa kadez Bouye, nou kadez Bouye gaseyè, Bouye menmi, li convizay ki ouvou.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to give you a second chance.
Did I see a burret on a ladder?
Se zanp la donm cosa cuwè cuwououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououououou
I can't take it with me.
Reve li dop or take bourre tou, m adevri bourre tou epwonn ikrank e bay la or put your epèp tou an ekotik bay yo.
If a man and a woman were to talk to each other, what would I do?
They are the same.
It's a matter of maneuvering with people and getting to know them.
You're also a man of my dreams.
I'm just going to have to go through an oral procedure to get a new one.
One or two men in the bourret ban m
Now I'm going to put a bag in your pocket.
If you don't see any men, you'll see them.
Eske two men in the bourret
If you have two men in your pocket, I will give you a card.
If you win, you will win.
It's because of the charade.
I'm going to tell you.
It's the first time I've seen it.
It's the only way to get to know each other.
He was the son of his brother Charet La Bourret.
I don't know what to do with myself.
El Baze sou the same Bazagèl m, don different sensitivities of the animals that are present only with those who serve them.
No, on a fresh machenn, I don't even know if I'm going to be able to bring myself to fall.
Man, good, good, what's the matter with you that you're going to fall in love with your mother?
Men, when the pop version comes out, what's the big deal?
Akanman Yo will play a game.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
There's no such thing as a free lunch anymore.
men or now
I'll tell you what I'm going to do next.
I can make you wine.
Yo tan as ou ka fwon di
As a man, I want to go to my room.
I'm sure you'll be able to put your hands together.
It's about ten tons a ton.
I can't wait for the wine to come out.
I've been drinking wine for a long time.
I can't wait to hear about it.
I can't get enough of them now.
I'm going to take a look at this man.
M is now l.
Men are not all who know you.
All men are men, all men are men, and all men are men, and all men are men, and all men are men, and all men are men, and all men are men, and all men are men, and all men are men, and all men are men, and all men are men, and all men are men, and all men are men, and all men are men, and all men are men, and all men are men.
It's not just me now, it's me now.
Don't think I've ever seen anything like this before.
I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results.
I'll be with you soon.
Well, well, but what am I, good makay is, looks, what am I, what am I, what are you doing now more than you know?
Don't tell me if you are the same as your mother's French counterpart.
You are a dimen
There are two pitimi an pitimi an pitimi.
There's a lot of people out there.
It's the same person.
Men are more likely to be men than men.
When a child is born, they have the right to live a healthy lifestyle.
Let's get to know each other.
San mason pou la
I'm sure everyone can relate to me.
Men, you know, don't have season I too.
La se Maiunya l passasya, pas kounya Mai is a councilman of the people.
We all know that we can't do anything.
I've always wanted to be a mother.
After the lemon falls with the Kondo.
Apple releases it as a snack.
The main reason for this is that it is not necessary.
Nan bay groupman and a groupman.
There is no membership fee.
For a few months, I've been working with the group members.
One hundred years later, the two men worked together.
Where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a, where a,
For the sake of a
It's not easy being green.
Chou fè kòve isit nou base m ak baray ak pòby amegamè
Well, if I'm going to work hard for this, I'm going to come after my chakou.
Yo vin bon konkou
I've been waiting for the new wine.
Or they're going to make a disbelief out of these people.
Now we're going to have to do something about it.
Or a series of people.
men an kalike or pa dwe moun nan rajan sou or vle ba or any anfen
Men are men.
So you want to be a part of it.
If you want it, you want it.
I don't want to work for you.
It's also my birthday.
If you don't do it now, you're going to do it again.
behind the backs of the critics.
Bayay sa a yo tou
While you're at it, you'll either have to go to the bathroom or go to the bathroom.
Or I'll have to ban you now.
You know what you should do.
It's either during the day or at the end of the day.
What's the matter with you?
I'm with you and I'm with you and I'm with you and I'm with you and I'm with you and I'm with you and I'm with you and I'm with you and I'm with you and I'm with you and I'm with you and I'm with you and I'm with you and I'm with you and I'm with you and I'm with you and I'm with you and I'm with you and I'm with you and I'm with you and I'm with you.
I don't know who you are.
I'm with you guys.
I'm with you guys.
I'm with you and I'm with you.
That's because you don't have a choice for me.
The people of Bandhan an Kalipi
It's not like you're on a level or you don't want to be on the brink of extinction.
Because it's not a problem.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it, and I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
It's either you or me.
I'm on the mountain with you.
I'm going to go up a mountain.
I'm going to tell you a story that will make you feel better.
The same is true of pranik.
One generation may know everything about it.
Or you're all going to have to deal with the fact that you're a woman.
It's a good idea to wear a coat of arms.
I'm not going to be a co-worker.
There are six genres.
I'll be there for you.
Let's get to the bottom of it.
Or I'm going to tell you.
Or re-read your mother's words.
Chatri a se m kouchou chat
chatri yo chatri tou
I've come to the conclusion that I'm not the only one.
I'm going to tell you right now.
As you can see from the top.
Yo gen vin sa Koukèm fils tandan
We don't even know if we're going to make it or not.
me or even a concert gre
I don't care what you say or what you say.
Or to lie down or even to lie down.
Bay or now.
Now you're all made of men.
I'm going to tell you.
No cycling at all.
Now we know what it's like.
That's what I want you to do.
I listened to get a replay of everything and everything I know right now.
Gen w mwen, gen w mwen ka w zep yo is just like a whole li, zep for another?
I can't wait to get started.
Li moutè kou can can can
I don't know how many people are there.
The man is a man of many talents.
If the men's genome is to be examined, the men's genome is to be scaled for cattle or sheep.
Now pick up your pick.
You're a good boy, and I'm a good boy.
Because even if you're a great person, you're going to have to work hard.
It's time to move on.
The same can be said of the lake itself.
I'm going to tell you a story about a man who didn't want to go to the bathroom.
Is there anyone who can make me feel like I'm on the other side of the tracks and that's all there is to it?
It's the kind of person you've been talking to before.
It's hard for people to get tired of coffee.
The plant is planted in the mountains.
and plant as a vegetable.
A plant is a plant.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it through the day.
I'm going to rent this place.
Or tea, anmon, l-dress, e-trap tea and all the tea you're going to take in, goubèt, or beef now.
Mohan, please take my mission and I will serve you.
It sounds like a canteen, an, um, a nap and a nap.
If you don't do that, you'll see it.
Why would you want to do that?
It's made with cheese, bay, tomato, pork, spices, and lettuce, and everything in between.
I'm going to visit you on the other side.
It's the garden of zlay.
Now that you're dressed up, I feel like if I can't lift myself up, I can't.
Well, if you're looking at a series of them, you've got a pretty good tip about it.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa!
Santa Prann, the thunderbolt, Wopp remetan where you can get it, when you can get it.
And if you don't want to do everything you can to help yourself, how can you help yourself?
Wow, that's what I'm doing.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
Senjan is the son of Senjan.
I don't know about you.
Or not to pass Senjan
or passing through Senjan
I'm from Senjan and I'm from Senjan.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I can't wait to see what you come up with.
Pass the senjan kanmen to the machine.
There's a lot more to it than that.
The road to the festival of December all a
I'm going to give it a second chance.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
What am I supposed to do?
Out of 1982, in question 1705, or Enit for a second glance, how do you know how to do this?
There is no other way to do this.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything else.
I'm not going to give you a hint.
They say that there is good power to do evil.
They also make them white.
I don't know what you know.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know if it's true.
Now I'm going to tell you where the world is.
They know what they're doing and what they're doing.
I don't know if I'm going to make ice cream.
I'm going to tell you about the men I know who are going to help you.
Men have the right to vote.
We can win the fight.
I'm going to tell you about men.
If there is no such thing, then there is no such thing as a free lunch.
There is no such thing as a childhood experience.
Do it or leave it alone.
This is how I feel about doing the right thing so as not to hurt you.
They've been doing it for a long time.
They made a great grandchild.
I know what to do.
I mean, do they know what to do with me?
Jan n rele
That's how I got back to it.
I pray that they will return.
I feel like I can do it.
No one is able to relieve it.
One of them is the same person.
What is the meaning of coffee?
However, the answer is that they are not happy with it.
Or you can buy it.
It's the same as the third one.
What do you know about this?
Men, listen carefully to what you say, and what you say, it's so dry, men, you know what I mean.
Or do you or don't you know?
People know how to pronounce it and how to pronounce it, to pronounce it, to pronounce it, to pronounce it, to pronounce it, to pronounce it, to pronounce it, to pronounce it, to pronounce it, to pronounce it, to pronounce it, to pronounce it, to pronounce it, to pronounce it, to pronounce it, to pronounce it, to pronounce it, to pronounce it, to pronounce it, to pr
I can't help it.
I took a picture, and it was a good one.
Wow, where can I go to see you again?
Kaya, don't worry, you're all right, I'm all right.
I'm sure there's something good about the foul game.
I have a large stomach and a sore throat.
It's time for them to get back on track.
I don't know if you've ever heard of Li.
It's like the people.
a, so how do you call it li?
Depo is a fan of the city, and it's the people's way.
What's the big deal?
Well, for the people, or I'm going to make a big deal out of it.
OK, so you don't know if it's a fish, a pie or two loumen or you don't know if it's a sauce or you don't know if it's a sauce.
A, o, se sa.
Gen yon ki good poulestom and do bad.
It's been a long time coming.
The same can be said about the things I know.
It's not like I'm walking around with it.
What's the matter with you?
How do I get back to my soul?
What do you think I'm going to do?
If you know how to take a good photo, I don't know how to take a bad one.
I don't know anything about it yet.
I don't know everything about you.
Dakon kon se lanman or know
I know I'm not going to be able to use it.
Don't do the same thing to me.
non lanman e bay non lanman e bay
Many people know that there is no cure for the disease and that there is no cure for it.
Or browse with the front door and drink.
You don't know what it is.
You can't make them like the rest of the world.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I don't know how I was born to say no.
Gen yon la ankòm ba gen genou photo l
There are people who say or do what they know to do on a regular basis.
It also makes them feel sorry for themselves.
Or they'll have a lot of fun.
Or wash kay with li.
It's a mixture of laziness and laziness.
Do you know my voice?
You're not going to be able to keep up with them.
It's not like I'm going to make a mistake.
I don't know if I'll be able to do it myself or not.
There is no other way.
There is no other way to do this.
I don't know what it is.
Li ka gen dang nou because li pou yon ti can song yo woun men do soul li
People should be able to do something about it.
I don't know who you are.
I'm going to say goodbye to Ramsey.
We have heard the words read.
Something that's even more important than life.
It is celebrated on ti chapo.
There's a lot more to come when I'm born white.
When the men began to drink wine, they knew how to make a living in Bondapye.
Or they're just like you.
Even if you're in a position where you're not, you're in a position where you're not.
One year later, it was redone.
Do you know who I am or what I am?
Don't they have food yet?
I'm going to make the plank, I'm going to make the furniture with it, I'm going to make it in one color.
Okay, so you know what?
Yo, Manyòk, nou nou nou, how good it is for a big tree to be golden, m apou.
Okay, sa, that's my brother.
When I was a grandmother, I was a collector.
Do you know this?
Nan Mady Gramoun, who is known to be the only one left, took you back to her.
But, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey,
The gene is of the same shape as the gene itself.
The men in the class are very proud of their achievements.
It's not just the back of the neck, but the back of the neck, the back of the neck and the back of the neck.
It's a great plan for your life.
It's like the legs are still there.
Or do you know me?
Li kon bay bon and the music in swazo sa a
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
It's another one too.
They know what they're doing.
It's not easy to find something fun to do, but everyone knows that every child gets something easy.
You're not going to be able to do that again.
They have a green color.
He was born with a blood clot under his feet.
It is under the influence of the Greek philosopher L.
Below the school and the men cheli
One of them is yellow.
The whole world is full of evil and some of it is evil.
I don't know what I'm going to do, but I know what I'm going to do.
There is a difference in the color of the bren and odol.
Almost blank under the vent li
It's not like we're sitting under the covers.
on almost blank.
With great joy you are in front of the chak cell li yo M ap konzi nou genyen konn di swazo sa a
swazo a releasing swazo kànn
You don't know what I'm talking about.
nou konnou swazo yo rele swazo lapli
I don't know who he is.
It's easy to see how they're not so easy to see.
The two cities are the same.
I want to be able to fly.
They beat their cells.
I don't think it's the only thing I can do when I re-release the kit.
I don't know if you know me or not.
It also makes them, along with other fruits, of palm trees.
It's not like I'm not going to be able to do it.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
And then there's the current situation.
The account is now open to the public.
Let's get out of here.
I've been thinking about it a lot.
I don't think I'm going to be able to do that again.
It's not like I'm going back to the drawing board.
Other than that.
This is the first time I've ever heard of pale de zekalanderik.
I don't want to hear about it anymore.
I've heard you say it before.
We don't know how to listen.
It's the first time I've seen it.
I've always wanted to do something different.
You've got a ton of things to say.
For example, if you want to plant a plant in a kiviyan, you have to plant it.
Nonmen or yo dakò is the theme of planting a vine thing when people and wine plants are planted in the same genus.
Gen m yon cell around sa yo pa gen order chan yo rele li
For example, the
It's easier to fall for the things you've been doing for years.
That's what I'm saying.
I'm going to win.
I'm not going to say anything about it.
Let's get to know each other.
In Chechès Bagay I planted a plant to separate people from each other.
Yo men yo yo call sa Bòd Pò a package of things like plant people plant
I'm going to have a car that's going to take care of me.
If there's a bunch of stuff I'm going to take away from you, I'm going to put it in my car.
The car came in handy.
Odi is my car.
There is no such thing as a free lunch or a free lunch.
I'm going to get a card from my car.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
Or give someone a job that they can do for themselves.
bay la bon non is separated from each other.
How do you call it?
Do you call yourself an associate, or are you one of those people who are on the other side of the world?
Obe, I will work half of it.
Donk se, half, carimon, bon, pa gen.
There's a lot of other things I'm going to say.
I'm going to the bank and I'm going to the bank and I'm going to the bank and I'm going to the bank and I'm going to the bank and I'm going to the bank and I'm going to the bank and I'm going to the bank and I'm going to the bank and I'm going to the bank and I'm going to the bank and I'm going to the bank and I'm going to the bank and I'm going to the bank and I'm going to the bank and I'm going to the
For example, I'm not going to write a note to tell you that I'm not going to do anything wrong.
I'm going to give you a piece of paper.
I'm not going to get married again.
It's all in your head.
It's the only way you're going to get it.
I'm not going to say anything about the recipe.
They're dead again.
I can't wait to see them, I can't wait to see them.
Yes, I'm going to do the right thing.
What do you think?
Are you ready for this?
Is it green tea?
What do you mean?
I've been waiting for you to hear my voice.
En men bon
Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
There are so many things I know to take you up on than you do.
The kids are all over the place.
It's not a good idea to keep it in your pocket, but it's a good idea to keep it in your pocket.
Kichan yo rele mod tessa yo
Things I know better than men.
Whether you're free now or not, you're going to have to make up your mind.
To me, the people are in a corner.
My brother and sister, now you're on your way to a grill of grass.
Enben, how did you get back to the bay?
Obviously, you don't know how to cook your own food or drink.
O Gwen yo rele le e true
I've been waiting for you to call me back.
I'm not going to lie to you.
Who knows how to buy tea?
I know how to mount a purse and buy a purse.
I know I'm going to buy something and pay for it.
It's a pay-as-you-go package.
They're going to kill people.
Or will do.
It's like an envelope.
They're like a soul, they're like a thing, or they're going to die.
Man, like I'm going to tell you.
Okay, so that's it.
Like, like, I'm a nine-year-old boy.
When you expose or win a jade you will do, the epithet is what you can do first.
Will you be able to eat meals?
So, why would you want to do that?
I'm going to answer the phone.
Will I be able to make it clear?
It's time to clear a garden.
Give me a package of them.
I'm going to do something about it.
or pons sa
or men m ap bay
Can you make a meal?
So, if I ask you again, can you give me a chance to take a pill?
I don't know if it works that way.
For example, there is no such thing as a life-saving plant.
How do you take the pill and how do you get rid of it?
Just a little bit.
If you don't, you'll be able to set up your own shop or shop.
I've got a good place to go and I've got a good place to go and get some fresh water.
As if I'm going to say w
The first step is to begin the process of getting to know each other.
Why are you crying like that?
If you're just starting out on the ground, what are you doing?
Why don't we cry like this, wherever we go, wherever we go?
A little behind that?
Plant, or potatoes that have been cut down to put in the potatoes, what do you think?
Since you've planted a lot of plants, you've cut off the seeds and put them in the pot, so what's the point?
What is the answer to this question?
Loryè se yon flè, or gen doy ap cut li to put in batè, or gen gen gen.
Gen gen plant and ap plant
Se pa grann nan yo plant
It's not like tomorrow is going to be a good day for me.
Se yon morrow yo take yo plant
If I were to plant another plant, I would say a man and a woman, but I don't know a man.
I can't wait to release it.
I can't wait to release the boutique.
I'm going to do this tomorrow.
or put under the tea.
It's been a year.
I feel sorry for you.
It's not just me, it's my soul, it's my soul.
I feel sorry for you.
How do you call it when you don't know the man?
I can't wait to get back to you.
Men can feel sorry for me.
Or should I plant it again?
Okay, let's plant it again.
Will you plant it in your garden?
Okay, even I'm in the middle of it.
The same applies to you as well.
Do you have any branches in your garden, if you plant them, or how can you grow them again?
In the meantime, I'm going to plant a seed.
You can't just plant a heart and eat it.
It's not even a plant.
Where is the order of John Ka Di Li?
There's no order for John again.
Now I'm ordering John or I'm going to tell him again.
Ok cover it covered with a layer of to to to jou
It's okay to pass on your life or your vote.
There is a lot of good wine to be made.
Fin kou pwon ke bwa so w ki te and gen rele
It's a bit like that.
I'm not going to lie to you.
W ap foure ou e Wa or well pickwa well fon l l can return
I'm sure you'll be able to find a solution to this problem.
I'm looking forward to seeing you again and again and again and I'm looking forward to seeing you again and again.
The people who are responsible for this are the people who are responsible for it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
We're going to get to the bottom of this.
Anjeuke Souke is a man of knowledge.
They're so close to being dead.
It's a good idea to buy a credit card.
It's a lot of people's lives.
It's time to do it again.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to keep up with this guy.
We are either Men or Men.
There is no such thing as a two-wheeler.
I know I'm in a hurry.
I don't know what to do with myself.
If I had to do something like this, I'd have to pass it on, and if I had to, I would have done it.
What do you think?
Well, here we are.
If you want to add a pack of tea, for example, tipta
I'm going to collect it.
To understand the ranmase of a nou
That's how they got there.
For example, or to do so.
Or take a drink.
Byon o wou tchap o byon o wou tchap
Put something on or plant something.
Or take a drink.
Oh, bay tea, inpri sofè la, pou al met grandmother sofè l l l, or fouye thé?
It's not just me.
For example, planting a plant after a certain period of time.
The side or two of the tire will appear at the bottom of the lap.
In the lap of the doye
If you don't or don't want to give up, don't give up.
The people of Kazin ap donnen yo men l'ap jevi
Now I know what to expect.
We're not going to be able to see it.
Or it's going to take a little bit of a break.
Mason li li is a.
It's an example of planting something you want to eat or drink.
Or two of them.
In the morning after the day you appear or two days before you.
So I'm going to do it.
I'm going to give you a little bit of advice.
I'm not sure if I'm ready for it.
Or love the donnen
Or take a nap before the sun goes down and the moon goes down.
I've been waiting for you.
There is no order for you to do it again.
I'm going to do it again.
I'll take a look at some of them.
So what's the big deal?
Take it easy and pass it by to give someone a chance to get to know you.
I don't know if I'm going to make it today.
or take school.
The new convexity and the ability to communicate with people about the things that matter most to them makes them aware of it.
Jou moun pa done kalbas
Yes or no, it's a good idea.
I'm going to take a look at some of the things I've done so far.
Apri rekri koukouye
I'm going to try again.
Now that you've seen it, you've got to know what you're talking about.
A good mother is a good mother.
I'll tell you what to do.
I'm going to be a big fan of the expanse or the new place.
on the first time in a
What season is it or is it in the bay de donnezon?
If I'm going to make a donation, what do I do?
When it comes to equity or debt, whether it's debt or equity, what's the big deal?
There is no such thing as too old composition in Rome.
I'm not saying yes.
Gen or straight pill to make tchak la a
You're the one who's going to die.
The thing is now and yenn yo rele l
It's been going on since the beginning of time.
From the bottom of the river to the top of the tower.
It's not like we're on the same page.
Are you ready for me?
It's not like we're going to get it right.
You'll be able to find a tree that will take you to the other side of the world.
I'm going to go up to the mountain and up to the mountain.
What do you think I'm going to do?
When will we meet again?
We don't run, we don't base anything on it.
What can I do to help you?
Can I buy it?
You're not the only one to take it, you're the only one.
Will it cost a lot of money to build a new one?
and so only yo card
I'm sure you'll be able to find the right one.
There's a lot more to it than that.
It's like a big bay.
I'm not going to let you down.
Don't get me started on a whole bunch of stuff.
What's wrong with you?
Gadiou packed things?
It's not like we don't know what's going on.
It's not like we're going to be able to get out of here.
If you're in the picture, you're in the picture.
We're not going to be able to do anything about it.
We're not the only ones.
It's either good or bad.
I don't need a man to kill me.
On Pye Bwa you two tout bay sa yo
Appears to be on the packaging.
I'm going to tell you a story about my life.
Or two beds that are completely white.
I'd rather be dead than dead.
You're not going to die.
anma di fleri
There is nothing new that can be done about it.
What's your birthday?
Are you going to re-release it?
Nou ben bò sofa wè swade
It can be thrown away as a boon.
Don't try to make me feel bad.
No, I'm not cutting a new one.
Don and cut me off, or cut my branch off.
This is the only way to get rid of them.
By the end of the year, you'll be able to make a difference.
We're going to have to cut back on our lives.
Ride things down and hold a chouk bra underneath the tea.
Yo renne sa.
I've been fighting for so long, and I've been fighting for so long.
That's the only way I'm going to get back on track.
It's not like you're going to be able to do it again.
I know it's true.
Gen yon series of debagay to put men or on the line or put people on their limbs.
We're going to have to go back to the drawing board.
A series of debwa do you do, or ba lankou or gadwon ba e blanch faret yon rele sa.
If by exsanpout or take a one in the palm of your hand, I know how to get the most out of your life.
I put on my own kay o ben yo make a short one relay sa
I know how hard it is to do this.
Bon or w pale de corps bannann
It's not so much that it's sour, it's that it's banned.
The ban was lifted.
Why is it so often that you don't know how or why?
Who's the boss of things?
For example, a coubyan benjan is a person who puts something on the head of a nail to make it look good.
I've been able to keep up with the pace.
Is this the only way I'm going to get back to you?
I'm going to tell you what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do, what to do
Whether it's on the road or any other road, I'm going to run.
I want to explain to people what I can do right now, a challenge.
Who is Boujan Yon?
Some people know how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run, how to run.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it.
Bon e si pa ekzanm e horse or bezan now
There are a few ways to get a credit card.
Now you know what you can do.
as the salt monkadi
My card is on the way.
But now it's up to you.
I'm going to take a look at this.
I don't know how to plant a good series of plants, for example.
That's how you can do it.
That's how you do it.
I've given you several of these bags.
Li an nou can release sa.
When you're ready to make a cup of coffee at the branch, you're ready to pack a cup of coffee in a cup of coffee.
but grat will be OK
Or maybe it's just a grape.
I can't put my finger on it.
Tab or kagou is one of the things that keeps me going fast.
Release the Jen
Coconut is a gen of things inside and out of the blanch, you know.
Someone is something that is new now, something that has just come out, something that I don't want to be.
I'm not sure if I'm ready or not.
I'm your guardian.
Gen an releases sa gen an releases sa
Bon se Grin nan men sa or now a same
as if one were to die.
other people's things.
It's the only way I've ever met you before.
And that's what I'm doing right now.
I met the Count.
It's like a tree.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
I'm going to release it.
Gren se non sa w can now or li
It's not like you're going to be comforted.
Kelk swapye as a bow.
It doesn't matter if it's a swap to something or to the present.
I'm not going to ask for anything.
Se konzal or rede li
You don't know what I'm talking about.
On foot of pran len
With the help of a friend.
I'm going to tell you that I don't want to be here.
Or I'm going to flourish.
I don't know what to do with myself.
It's like a Chaje.
It's hard to believe that someone is so good at it.
Or did the root fall into a man's mouth?
Or I'll take a bite to eat again.
Or take the bonz.
or rapre pran l
or in the base l.
Or you can take it for yourself.
It's true that there's a long way to go before it's too late.
It's time for the conswote dim Alba nou
Or believe it or not.
Take it or leave it Mwen an an an an
Good things or things against my brother under my roof can be sold or sold.
Or do you want to sell it?
We men, if not as a sire, if not as a depate, or if not as a winner?
If you are a man, you are a man.
Take a cup of water, or a cup of tea, and finish it.
Add water to the plant so that it can be soaked in water.
There is no need to look for water to pass through the tea.
You don't know what you're talking about.
Everything is not known or men men vi.
Or do you know the tranche I'm bringing you for a pass, which you don't know?
So if you are, if you are going to laugh, you are going to come out of it, and you know how to laugh.
It's a lot of fun, but it's a lot of fun.
I don't know what they're talking about.
Can you hear me?
Who is it, yo dirigol lari?
How do you know what to do with it?
A good, okay, don't use the ritual and the canon is the same thing.
Things you can do when you brush your hair or when you wash your face with water can come out of your mouth.
Gen yo releases sa
Or do you know?
This is how you can get through the water from the crane.
But it's a good thing I've done to allow them to get in there.
For a new generation, they won't be able to keep up.
A large body of water passes through it.
For example, a large water bottle can be used to take water from a water source to a water source.
Great men will give water to everyone else.
Depending on the location
There is no such thing as a right of passage.
On your way to take the Micho.
And they continue to make good use of it.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
It's a great way to get to the beach.
Or I'd like to see more men like you.
I'm a good type of calendarist and I'm a channel person.
I'm going to go with the amen or the amen before I can take it to the other side.
In other parts of the world, I don't want to call you again or I don't want to call you on the green channel.
For example, if you want to buy a car, you can buy a car.
You don't have a window.
I don't know Chinese very well, but I've got a new one.
I don't know what I'm going to bring.
If my channel is on the right track, I'm going to do something like this.
I've always wanted to do this.
Mebezen made for the entrance to Kawou a
Movwon ti kote
I'm going to enter.
I'm looking forward to the next one.
Bakonn and Jan Nou rele sa
Know how to show it very well and how to do it.
It's not for you.
Men or women.
You'll be able to get through to the entrance.
How did you get there?
I'm going to tell Jezyal what to do.
If you like it, you can still enjoy it.
I'm going to be able to do this for a while.
For example, if you are a queen, or if you are a queen, you can keep men.
Pi is defined as the amount of time it takes to pass.
Or maybe you'd like to be the only gay man.
M pa ka y apitans yo konn put around you
I don't know how to break up with you.
Li longti jan yo rele yo
There's no other way around it again.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
I mean, I don't even know how to cook, do I?
I can't believe this.
It's the same app.
I know that I have a lot of privileges and privileges.
I don't think I'm going to let you down.
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
No, I'm not trying so hard to call it quits.
The same is true of a platon printer.
on the printing press.
One of them is a printing press.
There are many men who believe in robbery and theft.
I'm going to release it.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
Do you know what's going on?
I'm going to take a picture of you.
One of the tools even I know how to take and one of the tools I know how to use to keep a secret.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to hear it, but I'm not going to be able to hear it.
I'm going to tell you something new.
I'm here again.
Gen yon mann and contingency code a code that is key to the mountain and affects you, an anvil el.
So, pet, is that the same thing?
Mesil code is a typewriter.
It's time to change the code.
It's just that I don't have anything to take or cut right now.
An example of this would be the use of a
Netwaye jan nan gen an rele pouto
Something I've heard on the radio and on the radio.
I'm going to re-release it.
I'll give you the price.
We can't afford to lose weight.
Now that I've been able to cut through the whole thing, I've been able to cut through the whole thing.
This is not a good king.
The fagon on tizouti is the secretary of the so-called Collette sou mwen an an ki color w or ka di li la
The color is a.
The colour and colour can be different.
It's your passport.
I'm sure you'll get a good idea of the pitch.
It's not the same.
The colour of the skin is the same as the colour of the skin.
It is the color of pi.
I don't know what kind of clothes to wear.
And then there's the other one again.
I know exactly what the Blanch Tou bid is.
The colour is the same as yours.
It's not about what you do or what you don't do.
And the color of the color may be different.
the color of the device.
The colour will be dark again.
When you're done with it, you're done with it, you're done with it, you're done with it, you're done with it, you're done with it, you're done with it, you're done with it, you're done with it, you're done with it, you're done with it, you're done with it, you're done with it, you're done with it, you're done with it, you're done with it, you're done with it, you're done with it
No, if a gray coffee is added to make milk, I'll send it to you.
Li gri, se console bon an an, where you are both li li, letter letter, letter seven of them l.
I don't know, I don't know what it is.
Do you know what color wouch is, good, what color wouch is, or do you know what color wouch is?
Goulè is someone who knows you.
It's the people who have a lot to say about it.
I don't know what to do with myself.
You plant a plant and I'll look for you in the morning and I'll give you a bag to cut tomorrow.
I've got a lot of money to spend on it.
I can't wait to see you again.
Olici also knows how to make jams in the woods.
A good foot nearer to the foot than a lout nearer to the foot.
The bar is equipped with a teapot.
What do we know?
Ton Mare, Bon, I don't know.
I don't even know who the color is.
The economy is not so rich.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to eat this colorful person.
It's the colour of Mary's tone.
Ton maryen an jon ton maryen an jon
It's not like you're going to get it.
m for the propod volyen adam
I can't tell you why I can't do it.
The colour of the tonmaren is so bright.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
It's not a color.
M gen moutè
Or in the mouths of men.
I'm going to buy a car.
It's a good idea to buy a phone.
Buy a phone or phone.
I'm not going to tell anyone who's going to be a big fan of it.
Yo pa plen tè men plen
Great people like a full-blown audience.
plenbitation or well plen.
What kind of pack of animals do you want to eat again, right?
We've got two packages of gradinay.
He sent me a large package of interest.
The gen order li again
I'm going to tell you.
I don't want to give you a whole bunch of encouragement.
Matten by saying what kind of person you were when you were a kid.
Or to do something about it.
The men I put on the couch were among them.
The wine is made from grapes and spices.
I'm going to take a look at it and I'm going to tell you.
It's not like you're going to die.
I don't know what I'm going to do.
There is no such thing as a free lunch or a free lunch.
You know what I'm talking about, and you know what I'm talking about.
It's not like I'm in the middle of it.
I'm on my way.
Let's talk about what we're going to do.
I'm going to play a game.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do next.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do when I die.
I'm going to leave you with a hat.
Do I take or do I take anything that I can bring to the animal kingdom?
Or, more accurately, for men, if any.
Kad yon pout is now bachwa, lobo bi villet.
Or remen sou pa vle di di sa or from now on
Let's suppose that you have a package for the sea gen kouchon gen horse gen bef gen good thing
Bon or pran or pran sa or di m se now l releven
It's now or never.
Good luck with a fight, for example.
You're going to throw a series of debays behind the scenes.
If you want to know, you can do it.
I can't wait to see what everyone else is up to.
The cattle's dolls are kept in the book so that they can make the best of the beef.
There's no such thing as childbearing.
on animals and reproductive systems.
It's all in your head.
If you are a cow and a sheep, you are a beast.
There are two types of men.
Or at the door of the cattle.
I've been waiting for you to call me back.
I don't know if any of the animals will be able to reproduce or reproduce.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to have a baby or not.
One or the other.
We are animals that cannot bear children.
I can't have children, even if I can't have children.
Gaden is on the move.
The animals are unable to bear children or farm animals.
I'm going to be a farmer for a month and I'm going to be a farmer again.
I ordered a pair of jeans.
I'm going to tell you why it's important for me to get up and go to the bathroom and get back to the bathroom.
They're not for sale.
They're not for sale.
Li jang an yo di again
That's what I'm saying.
You'll never know when your child will die.
It's all about giving birth to your child to die.
I'm going to tell you this before I die.
It's the same thing with chak sa.
After all, I'm going to die.
There's no one else I'd like to talk to about.
I'm not going to let you die.
I'm going to have to kill you.
I'm going to have to die.
I'll tell you what to do before I die.
Since then, it has spread to the dead cell.
Do you know how many times you're going to be able to bowl?
It's a great way to catch up with them.
It's not like I'm going to be able to catch up with you.
I'm in the middle of it all.
It's not like they're going to be able to do it.
I know I'm on the lookout for the lock.
The bouch li closed.
Se bouch only yo can say
I'm going to have to go to the bathroom.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do next.
I'm sure you've been there before.
Or what's the worst that could happen?
Why should I do it, if I do it, if I do it again?
Ri rele, you beep.
For example:
Yes, you are.
What if you don't know how to have a baby?
You are a gazelle.
Okay, they've got your kid.
I have a son, and you are a gazelle.
When a man finds a man, he leaves and searches for me, and I find him.
I'll tell you why.
That's why I'm here.
They're part of it.
There's no such thing as a free lunch again.
There are six of them.
Li jan anpò yo kadi sa enmen
They're finishing up their job.
There are two types of epilepsy.
They are equally asleep.
You won't be able to do it again or you won't be able to do it again.
I finally got the chance to do it.
There are two ways to do this.
It's all in your head.
It's a code that men don't even use.
On the se rime men great se yo
They were there for the pharaohs.
I'll never be able to play again.
I can't wait to hear it again.
They're very close to each other.
The men were beefed.
I've never been able to have children before.
They are young gazelle.
You've seen this kind of beta happen with an antidote behind it, don't you know what's going on?
Men, or you, or Di vay Beef la ve because anti beef dail?
Well, is it just that, or can it be?
Or can you say that it's because it's anti-gal, anti-beef?
If you have a similar or similar question, you can finally answer it.
How can I say yes or can I say no?
Or you can be a smoker.
or reaprenn sipa
I'm not going to say it again, I'm not going to say it again.
I'm going to say goodbye to my soul mate.
But it's all right with the account.
The children's accounts are now being paid in full.
That's the only way it's okay
vay bef the rhythm
It's okay to say that.
Vay bef la Plenn nan dey maten lògad dou du two sons ta sodi Vay bef la
I've lost a lot of money and I've lost a lot of money and I'm at risk of losing a lot of money.
For the most part, I don't want to lose my job or my job.
If a man is unable to have a child, he or she can have children.
Don't get an order from me again.
Good things come to a young child.
They're just going to be there.
How do you get back to me?
rele li, big pans of beef?
Or another gen gen gen an rele sa again
The company's beef cattle.
I've been waiting for you to come up with something new.
Groups of mothers and daughters of the same family.
Grouponans and gazelle beef are the same.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to do that.
There is a large seat on the floor of the mansion.
I don't know if I'll ever know.
I want to know what I'm going to do next.
It's not the same person.
It's time to get to the bottom of it.
It's time to take a breath of fresh air from those two people.
Such as those two generations of holy men who have done evil.
Is there a person who is not here or down there?
Obekél Mwen van tout panche is the name of the game.
This is why I rely on the same branch.
Okay, the thing is, we're going to have to go back to the drawing board.
I'm a member of the cattle herd.
Okay, here we go again.
This is the beginning of the cattle.
Okay, gen loll is still there.
No, it is not, it is not, it is not.
When someone makes you want to take the letter.
Or I'll just leave it at that.
I'm pretty sure I'm going to be able to keep up with what I'm doing.
I'm going to get the beef.
It's all right for the general order and ankon
They won't be able to sit under the seat.
That's what I'm doing.
I'm going to be the mother of the beef.
It's all right, white pets.
Bef la ba la
That's why I'm releasing it.
You don't have to eat beef.
They don't know how to cook, they don't know how to cook, they don't know how to cook, they don't know how to cook, they don't know how to cook, they don't know how to cook, they don't know how to cook, they don't know how to cook, they don't know how to cook.
OK pa gen order gen again
the order of jen anrile
That's why I don't use it anymore.
I can't believe when my brother gets the chance to re-evaluate the first thing he's done to me.
My mother told me that the first thing I had to do was to write a letter to the priest.
When the beef is gone, the beef is gone, and the beef is gone, and the beef is gone, and the beef is gone, and the beef is gone, and the beef is gone, and the beef is gone, and the beef is gone, and the beef is gone, and the beef is gone, and the beef is gone, and the beef is gone, and the beef is gone, and the beef is gone, and the beef is gone, and the beef is gone, and the beef is gone.
I don't know why I'm going to say this anonymously, but I don't know if it's true or not.
I'm going back to my roots.
It's hard to say, but it's hard to say.
I know, okay, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I
I know it's a lot of fun, but it's a lot of fun.
It's back to the drawing board again.
I fell in love with you.
I'm sick of it again.
I don't know any more.
They can be infected with the disease.
on the disease vant condition
The illness and condition will again be felt.
I'm sick and tired of it.
Yo rele ran blan m pa pa know yo pose sou do
Is it possible for you to put your beef on the table and put it on the table?
Ask the girls how they are doing.
Bet la yo pose sou dou bef lan
This is the only way I can make peace with myself.
There's no other way to do it again.
It's time to come back again.
Bet la ye le pout d'eau
Or I'm going to do it.
Is there anything else new?
Ma, do you have a picture of yourself, do you have a picture of yourself?
Okay, let's just say that.
Okay, so I'm going to head back and do my homework.
So use a new grease.
Or I'm going to kill you.
I'm always on the lookout for you and I'm always on the lookout for you and I'm always on the lookout for you.
Gen yon grele sa.
Genesis Babil, bef la, ked vyen nou, or gen dwan keep lou, se kou yo.
Genesis Gòji, beef la, gen order and again.
Genesis Saliv, beef la, and so on and so forth.
Sa Beef La pile at a
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
riyan sa rele
They are classified as a group of cattle.
There is no new generation again.
If you're new to the genre, you're new to the genre.
It's like the pouse marin gwen mouch yo
They've got a lot of beef in their mouths.
I'm right behind you.
It's not fresh beef.
It's not even a chat room, it's a chat room.
They don't die unless they are men.
I'm going to redeem it.
Larat redef la the red beef.
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
Yo rede larat
That's how I redeemed myself.
This is how I redeemed myself.
There's no such thing again.
Something is going to happen to you or someone else to get in there.
They're either li or li.
They don't know if they're going to win or lose or lose.
I can't tell you why I'm here.
It's the only way to get to where you want to be.
OK, well, if you know what I mean, I'll tell you what I mean.
OK, here we go again.
I'm going to be there too.
It's all about you.
Why not take a conversation at once?
It's the other way around, and it's the best way to go.
If all is well, brother.
It's all good.
A series of two people who don't know how to balance what's going on now, how are you?
You know, you've got a lot to do with it.
The bottom line is that it's not the end of the world.
It's not easy being green.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it.
2 boul sa t gen 2 boul la, or konn bat la, we bega, or not yet.
Or you can say that.
They're going to have to pay the bills, and they're going to have to pay the bills, and they're going to have to pay the bills, and they're going to have to pay the bills, and they're going to have to pay the bills, and they're going to have to pay the bills, and they're going to have to pay the bills, and they're going to have to pay the bills, and they're going to have to pay the bills.
2 balls to the men
Mann pa loll mann pa loll
You're going to have to make a big deal out of it.
I cut even to kill the beef and the food I brought.
The men were on the beef.
It is also cut for men.
They said, "You're going to lose your job".
They said it was a big deal.
The thing about beef is that it's the same thing.
or in a container.
There's a lot of bullshit going on.
It's as big as it gets or as big as it gets.
Don't worry about it again.
I'm a big fan of the genre.
The genus is large.
All the men are great and I am relieved.
There are a lot of people out there who don't have a dollar.
There's no other way to do it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it.
There's no other way around it.
It's good to be back in the saddle.
Yon se ride ba yo kounn now nan bef la
or twenn li san zou ladann ki jan w rele li
They're not releasing!
The religious leader and the pef la
It's a new generation again.
The person who has the right to sell is the person who has the right to sell the goods.
Yo machann rele
There's another one I'm going to give you again.
Other men now call me Bouchè
There is no such thing as a murderer or a murderer.
Men are going to kill me and take care of me.
I'm sure you've heard of it.
I'm going to take care of it.
It's not like I don't want to be here anymore.
The guy's not in Vienna.
I'm going to take a look at it and I'll take a look at it.
You're going to get another one again.
I can say that it's OK.
Another thing is that when people don't want to make such a big deal out of it, it's a big deal.
It's all the way around.
How many times do you think you're going to call someone like that?
An yel yo woulè
I'm not going to lie to you.
I'm not sure if it's true or not, but I'm not sure if it's true or not.
It's either a demon or a demon.
Ap bayay la pa to get out of the man who will lead you to a mountain that will lead you to an e leo mawoule
Setike mawoule is not a human being.
Don't be fooled into buying a new one.
It's like buying.
Or ban me from it.
The men are men of the poorest of the poor.
I'm going to tell you about it.
If you can't afford to sell it, you can't sell it.
He was unable to speak to anyone on the court.
This is an anmanjou kounm
People are buying a yo pouse a yo
I'm going to buy a yo-yo.
The big eyes, the thin eyes of the little ones, are the same as those of the little ones.
If you don't know the answer, you know the answer.
Don't go to lunch, but you can promise too, because you'll never know.
A woman or a woman.
I know a lot of women.
I'm also going to take you to the bathroom.
I'm on my way to your house.
Men are not women.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
It's a great way to get things done.
Don't give up or don't listen to me.
Yon bef pa eksanme Yon beet akón sa yo se se pou pou chay only yo pote chay sou yo up yo
You are the first animal, you are the last animal, you are the last animal, and you are the last animal, and you are the last.
I'm going to call you back for advice.
I'm not sure if Beta is available.
I'm going to call you BEF.
There's no more betting.
I'm going to call you Mouton.
Thankfully, the men are in the same boat.
Generally speaking, you're going to have to pass the mile to get to the council.
The men are going up to the nan kaden al vagayen.
Or come with you alone.
I'm going to leave you alone and I'm going to leave you alone and I'm going to leave you alone and I'm going to leave you alone and I'm going to leave you alone and I'm going to leave you alone and I'm going to leave you alone and I'm going to leave you alone and I'm going to leave you alone and I'm going to leave you alone and I'm going to leave you alone and I'm going to leave you alone and I'm going to leave you alone and I'm going to leave you alone.
I will leave you alone.
I'm going to take care of you.
You'll be able to get your hands on me for a few miles.
I've got a lot of beef in my pocket.
But I know I know who I am.
I'm not thinking about teaching.
I'm going to do this for you.
Now we're in the middle of something.
There are many ways in which you can fill in the gaps.
I'm on the train.
Men like to ride a train and ride a bike.
Men are more likely to lose weight or lose weight.
I'm going to load up on this one.
It's been a while since I've been able to do that.
There are two generations of other men.
It's not like I'm going back to the drawing board.
It's in the closet.
Good and bad for you.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
I can't wait to get back to you.
Is this how yo todo mounichita can be relayed?
All of these people can relate to me.
Because it's not the end of the world, it's the end of the world.
I'm not sure how I'm going to make it.
He is a former Corporal.
Yo an pa yo.
And then there was the train.
Okay, I'm not going to pre-empt the cabinets, men, I'm going to pre-empt the cabinets, okay?
or ap di sa
Yo prele l beef cabinet
It's good to know that we can bring the same chare.
It's not like we're going to be in this closet.
We're the only ones who can do it.
I believe in miles.
There's no way you're going to be able to do it.
I'm not sure if this is true or not.
I'm also very happy with the way it turned out.
But I know that the Lord will do anything to me.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Gen m onmillimetres
I can't wait to see it.
I'm with you on Mache
It's all about Bote May.
Men on their knees are now about a mile away.
I'm going to take a look at it.
My name is the Lord.
My name is Lord.
I am the king of kings.
A boat is a boat.
I'm not going to say anything about that right now.
There's a lot more to it than that.
I can't wait to get back to you.
If my brother is blessed to make me cry,
You are a beast.
I'm also sorry I've been carrying Echay al and walking with you.
It's a lot of fun.
You don't know anything about bourik
If all the animals belong to the animal, it is the animal.
Yo gen dwa releases like tadi
sason mal bourik
They don't know how to do the same with the animal.
If you don't know how to have a baby, you're going to call yourself a millionaire, and you're the only one who's going to win, and you're the only one who's going to win, then that's okay.
I'm going to respond to the version you're trey well.
The menus of pouki sa yo rele l tobya
I don't know how to fish.
He is now ill with tuberculosis.
How do you know if a bag can't hold your baby?
Toubya doesn't know how to make a human, animal, or soul, okay?
toubya sou yon api
A few miles from here.
I'm too tired to fish and I can't bear children.
This has been the case since my first creation.
The first creation of yo te bal non
Okay, well, let's say, for example, you've got a horse and you've got a horse and you've got a horse and you've got a horse and you've got a horse and you've got a horse and you've got a horse and you've got a horse and you've got a horse and you've got a horse and you've got a horse and you've got a horse and you've got a horse and you've got a horse and you've got a horse and you've got a horse and you'
I want to fill the gaps.
Either I'm going to get married or I'm going to get married.
I'm going to be on the same page as you.
An app sells again
I'm going to take a look at it.
And we're going to take it to the next level.
This is the same as taking me.
This is your second challenge to a guy.
Where I'm riding the horse.
I'm going to do something else.
Lo on the other horse I'm ap up your li
I'm going to tell you about the horse race.
What is the meaning of a horse's lap?
I'm a horse racer, and I'm a horse racer.
I'm in the middle of something.
I don't know what to do with myself.
As they are, the animals are floating in the same way as you are, and the decon of the countryside is white enough to make you feel better.
He's a sheep, he's a sheep, he's a sheep, he's a sheep, he's a sheep, he's a sheep, he's a sheep, he's a sheep, he's a sheep, he's a sheep, he's a sheep, he's a sheep, he's a sheep, he's a sheep, he's a sheep, he's a sheep, he's a sheep, he's a sheep, he's a sheep, he's a sheep, he's a sheep,
The things I've learned are that I've put myself in a position where I don't know what to do with myself.
They're in the closet.
They're in the middle of nowhere.
My friend on the other side of the world knows nothing about it.
It's the same with Ray.
We're going to have the same party.
or pass through.
It's a lot of fun.
If men could have a garden, men could have such a thing.
Men are not allowed to do anything for men.
Men or women.
E will know to order no
The man who knew me had a chief and an ambassador.
They'll know what to do with my boss.
He heard the words of the good chief.
Men alòsipri m kabrit aswa
Kabir is the head of the Kabir community.
I'm sure you'll be able to get a copy of it.
What do you want me to do?
If you do, you're going to do it.
Men, I'm on my way.
No, men, if you're my son, you know?
I'm in a niche for myself.
I'm going to tell you something.
The commands are not to be confused with the commands.
We can't do anything about it.
I feel like I'm in a bad mood.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to launch it.
I'm going back to the drawing board now.
If you don't know what you're talking about, you'll know what you're talking about.
It's also a great way to get a feel for yourself.
You can't go back to the drawing board.
It's the only part of my life I've ever had that I don't know how to live with.
Beef, no, no, the first soda a la, kabritou.
I like, or at least I like, making a chateau cabrit.
I'm a tank cabrit who needs to be able to handle the situation.
Don't worry, I'm going to call you too.
I know this man when he does it to take care of the same animals that I know in the valley.
I'm sure they'll know what to do with it.
Li santi bouk kabrit
You don't want others to know you're someone who feels great.
Men are not the same thing.
Some people feel like they're freezing.
I know of people who feel the same way.
I know who I'm talking to.
Yes, it's a good idea to use it.
I'm a fisherman and I'm a fisherman.
I feel like I'm going back to Alè
Tibet is known for its natural beauty.
One of them even led the band to a reunion.
Men, if you lead the band, I'll lead!
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
It's completely ahead of schedule.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
I am the governor.
The general order is before you can say.
It's the only way to kill animals.
When I retire, I'm going to have a problem, for example, with what I'm doing.
I'm going to retire because I know what I'm doing.
That's the only way to go.
If you're going to be an ex-boyfriend, you're going to be an ex-boyfriend.
They don't have children and they don't know what to do.
Li kouvre kouchon is also available.
You're on the guy who's on the couch.
Kayon people epi epi kayon people epi
The other two are the dolls or the dolls.
Or they'll tell you what to do with it.
I'm a man of talent and I'm a man of talent and I'm a man of talent.
Well, I'm not going to do another one again.
I can't take it with me.
I'm going to call you too.
Or another generation again.
I don't want to give birth to an angel.
OK, that's all I've got.
They're the couchons.
It's OK if I need a woman in time.
We will no longer be able to have children.
I've never had children.
Li jen anjewe ye anko
I'm going to tell you all about it.
After you've had enough, you've had enough.
Or an excuse.
After all, you've got your mother's cock.
I had a good time if it wasn't good.
It is unwise for a woman to be able to bear children and for a man to be able to have children.
You're going to have to go to the bathroom.
I can't wait to release it.
When will I be able to give birth, give birth, or give birth?
No, I'm going to call Mama Pochon, okay.
Now that I know how to play soccer, I know it's okay.
Do you know that I know how to cook, how to cook, how to cook, and how to cook?
Gil yo Labou Kouchon M
There are other things I don't know about anymore Men
I've seen a lot of videos about Labou Kouchon and M.
There's another thing I'd like to know.
Ba egyzant cut on swa bò la yo kouchon an
They gave the top thing for the people of the Chief of the Army.
He also agreed with the Commissioner for Human Rights.
Bon, eye, tonk w kichan yo, wap ka rele won li kouwa lòl chan.
ap ap de lakwann
It's either true or false.
If you're going to buy a coupon, you're going to buy a coupon.
Or you can cut it off and then you can cut it off.
I don't know if I'm going to cut it.
When the Egyptians cut the gold coins near the shore of the Nile, they were able to cut the gold coins.
Well, where am I, where am I, where am I, where am I, where am I?
M, from where do I come from, oh, oh, oh, oh, pallet, pallet, where do I come from?
We can't afford to lose weight.
I can't wait to see what you've got in store for me.
I've got my own pallet in my pocket.
They will know what to eat and what not to eat.
I can't wait to see what you're up to.
You are the one who knows how to take your breath away.
Especially when it comes to beef or beef, I don't know how to breathe.
It's hard to keep up with what's going on.
Or I could say I'm on a mission.
Well, if it isn't a beast, what can I win, buy, breathe, and say?
Emen bon pou Bèt la gagne ak or kadise
I'm so tired of men.
On a thing or two that is filled with water, there is no water in it.
Kochon an lad
The kabrit la lad lad
Men want to or want to know if I'm going to stop.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
I'm in the mood for pee
Don't worry, I'll be back in a few days.
The men were relieved of their duties.
Oh, my God.
I'm going to go back to the cabrit.
Now I'm ready to get started.
I don't know what it is.
Men have fallen to the ground.
As a child, I knew how to breathe when I was young.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do when I'm with you, and I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do when I'm with you, and I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do when I'm with you, and I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do when I'm with you, and I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do when I'm with you, and I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do when I
It's more like I'm going to call it quits.
I'm not going to pee.
I'm going to tell you something.
I don't know.
It's a good idea to wash your hands and feet with water and to wash your hands.
It's a great way to make sure you're comfortable.
I'm going to try and make sure that you're able to keep things together when you're ready.
Se non sa a only yo rele
You're not going to be able to eat it or even eat it.
It's not like I'm in my generation.
I'm going to take it with me.
And in a short time now they're going to be able to do it.
It's not just about men, it's about men, it's about men, it's about men, it's about men.
A good man can't wait to get back to you.
Men are all bad, but now they know what they're doing.
You know how much I'm missing.
nor kouchon an nor kouchon an
I don't know if it's an animal or not.
and kouchon an
Kadon kouchon n wè
I'm not going to lie to you.
You can't be the only one who can help you.
Once again, there's another generation.
It's not like you're going to be able to make a living off of it.
They're not going to be able to keep up with the demand.
This is what I'm going to do.
I'm going to use your code.
It's the only person who can do it.
I'm looking forward to seeing the sea.
Invite them to download your code.
La gen order yo again
You know what they're saying.
I'm going to re-read your code.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
You can print it or you can print it.
It's like renting something that's going up a cliff.
It's too much to ask for, but it's too much to ask for.
Don't give up on the rental.
You can't afford to pay rent.
If you don't want to die, you're going to die or you're going to die.
It's as if you're in the middle of nowhere.
I don't want to lose you.
You can't say you can take a horse.
I'm looking forward to seeing your birthday.
I don't know how many times I'll be able to run a lap.
There is no such thing as a lap bat.
Or it could be a beast.
There's no such thing as bad luck.
I don't have a lot of time to drink.
It's a good thing I've changed a lot.
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to make it to the top of the list.
It's ok to say that I'm twenty-one.
There is no such thing as a fisherman.
There's a whole new world out there again.
I'm sure you'll be able to meet thousands of men.
They're the same as before.
Miles are not miles.
I'm so sorry to hear about this.
Onm al bouwik ki monte
I'm going to do the mileage.
I'm up for a mile.
I am a horse.
They can also mean bad things to you.
It's not like I've seen it before.
Yes, I can't have children in Germany.
For example, I have a chef.
How much do you take?
Yes, I'll take care of myself if I'm going to do it.
How can I get rid of the flu?
I can't help but wonder.
We can't wait to see them.
I can't wait to get to Oman.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
Or they could say that.
I can't wait to see what you come up with.
Don't be fooled by what you're saying.
I want you to know that you can do it all.
I'm going to tell you a story.
It's the only thing that can make you feel good about yourself.
They ban a short Zagou.
If no one is asked to do so, whether it be by a pump, pump, or other means, I will be fired.
I'm going to release it.
Or in a cell room.
Yon wa fwonjan.
I spent the rest of my life trying to raise a family.
I don't know if it's bad or bad.
The evil menmen
It's hard to believe that it's been a long time coming.
Other than that, it's not good enough.
It's good to be together.
Gen yon chefal
Gen o yon ki counsel grenn
What's up with April?
Counsel grenn, if you're wrong, if you're wrong, if you think it's wrong, they'll do it to you.
It's not like I'm going to tell you.
I don't even think about what I'm going to say.
You've got a new look and color on your face, and you've got a new look and a new look.
I'm going to ride a horse and I'm going to ride a grey horse.
Se pa gri a Noun or ti an
You don't know what's going on.
Can you tell me what's going on?
I'm not sure if it's true or not.
I'm going to ride a horse for you guys.
Or with the help of men.
I don't know any men.
Is it an answer or not?
No, men, yes or no.
You're such a good horse.
This is a very good horse breed.
It's not that bad.
Don't worry, I'm going to kill you.
It's not like I'm going to kill you.
I'm not sure about that.
This is the first concert of Chevri.
Li yon gen ti color you know
What color is it, you know?
It's good or bad.
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to do that again.
If they can't see the color, they can't see the color.
It's the only thing I can do.
One of the colors is red, and one of the colors is red.
I used to have a tiquvi and a pencil.
Yon pent bren an an
It is located in Chwal Bay.
What's your birthday?
Well, chwal bay is a chwal that runs on a single color, a single color.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it.
I've been to chwal bay for a while.
The sound of your ears, and the sound of your ears, and the sound of your ears, and the sound of your ears, and the sound of your ears, and the sound of your ears, and the sound of your ears, and the sound of your ears, and the sound of your ears, and the sound of your ears, and the sound of your ears, and the sound of your ears, and the sound of your ears, and the sound of your ears, and the sound of your ears, and the sound of your ears
It's not like I'm going to tell you anything.
It's a color.
However, they are in the koula, in the color Meladan.
I'm going to give you an expanse.
We'll never be the first to say goodbye.
I can do that.
Ben, there's nothing you can do about it.
Once again, men, I'm going to tell you the truth.
Okay, well, how do you get on a horse like that, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if, if,
There is a general problem.
I don't know anything about the bays.
I'm going to go back to the drawing board.
That's how I'm going to get back on track.
Aren't they myths?
Okay, pa gen lòdi chan again yo.
That's what I'm talking about, too.
It's very good.
I'm going to try again.
Otherwise, it's a good thing if you don't.
I'm going to tell you the truth.
I'm going to tell you a story.
They're going to re-release it.
It's a good thing you're not going to be able to do it again.
I'm not going to say anything about it.
I'm not going to say goodbye.
It's called myel
They were ordered not to re-release it again.
Good after meals and drinks again and again and again and again.
Or it could be that they're just like me.
It's a good thing to have a window.
and the bays of the sea.
I'm going to make you say or say something.
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to make a cake.
Bon pa gen order chan again yo ka rele sa or kapab di
Or it can be made of honey.
Myel and Towa
Myel can also give an example or look at a tree that has not yet been planted.
The two men on the other side of the fence and the man on the other side of the fence and the man on the other side of the fence and the man on the other side of the fence.
The men watched the whole thing together.
And now look at what you're doing.
Do you believe in someone else or do you trust them?
Well, if you're going to do it, do you think you're going to do it?
Kadon krap, gadan krap, gadan m, or is it going to be a myel krap?
Okay, so what's the order of yon koy or di li?
Or are you going to have a honeycomb, or are you going to have a honey pill?
Yo bak or an an di desen mièl
or from the design of the miel
You know what I mean.
By way of example, ey lè
Okay, okay, well, if you don't want to call me Bon, where are you going to run?
I mean, they're running around in the middle of nowhere.
Well, we're not on the same page.
Anto kou myèl.
Okay, well, men, it's all about you guys, isn't it?
Bonkijan is called Bonkijan by the name of Bonkijan by the name of Bonkijan by the name of Bonkijan by the name of Bonkijan by the name of Bonkijan by the name of Bonkijan by the name of Bonkijan by the name of Bonkijan by the name of Bonkijan by the name of Bonkijan by the name of Bonkijan by the name of Bonkijan by the name of Bonkijan by the name of Bonkijan by the name of Bonkijan by the name of Bonkijan by the name of Bonki
You can't or won't.
Or I can make a phone call for a phone call so I can put on the phone.
bout of sa ou bay a
It's a battle of wills.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
Farim Lodi is here again.
Desamplified and generously supplied.
One year later, he was dead.
I'm going to have to make a mistake, I'm going to have to make a mistake.
This is the best way to do it.
And then there's the mountain and there's the wisanm.
The man who can make a difference in the life of a young man is a man who can make a difference in the life of a young man.
They will know pale debayy kontan or will know pale debayy kontan.
I know what you mean.
I know what they're talking about.
Enmen like or so you two are searching for a or fouyon thing
I'm not going to lie to you.
Gen ou lwa fouyon tanbou myèl
Or not another time.
You can't or won't.
a pade tanbou a a a a
Or you can say
I'm going to ship my mail.
I'm not going to take it any other way.
There is no other way.
If you want to start a colony, you can start a colony.
He is the brother of Isht wi wi yo gen wadi l
Because the members of the congregation don't ask me what I'm doing.
Men and women have been forced to retire.
I'm going to take a look at it.
We're not going to be able to do that anymore.
The seventh zanp w ap mande m
Will the decimal pi pass if it is withdrawn?
If you are retired, you will be employed by your company.
And I'm ready to retire.
Don't let him get away with it.
I'm going to release it.
We're going to re-release it as a men's clothing line.
I'm going to tell you what to do and how to do it.
We've got a lot of people on our side.
I'm going to re-release the album.
That's the only way to get there.
I know a way to call it that.
For example, if a pentad kap releases people and divides the tocket.
And how many of you are still here.
It's like I'm going back to the drawing board.
I can't help but wonder what I'm doing.
It's a good thing you're doing it.
I'm going to do it.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do anything about it.
One of them is wearing a cuff.
I'm going to give you a couple of gold bars.
The person who is responsible for the operation or maintenance of the facility is the person who is responsible for the operation or maintenance of the facility.
I don't even know how to make a card.
I'm going to try to make it work.
Myen I'm still here and I'm still here.
The pentad is w di
The code is not a gold standard.
This is the only way to make sure that you're comfortable with what you're getting yourself into.
Men, I say to you, all the finer things, all the finer things.
No, it's not that, it's that great thing I can do for you, it's the wine.
Who is going to retire?
The men who retired from the army.
Li gen dwa kite another month in the cake
There is no such thing as new.
The same thing is true of Chen Patichen.
Or, at the very least, so-called "meal".
Or so I said no.
Or so I said to other animals that I'd like to talk to.
Who can win the race?
I'm going to record against you.
I'm going to recruit people who don't want to talk about things but I'm going to put them on the line.
Do you think you're going to be able to do that?
Draw a picture of yourself.
It could be the person who can help you.
or men of the people.
Who can help you?
Anyone who can meet me can sing a song of praise.
We sing and sing.
Do you know what I'm going to do or what I'm going to do?
One way or the other.
There is no longer any order.
an order of the general assembly.
You've got to know how to get pregnant so you can have your baby and get pregnant.
When I'm ready, I'm ready, and when I'm ready, I'm ready.
Zhi zi myel la, so you know.
Because I don't even know if I'm going to make it.
This is what I want to do for you.
Emele, cake with honey, cake with honey, and so on.
It's good or I'm going to make a cake.
You're going to have the same birthday.
It's your thing.
It's not like I'm going to make a cake.
Yo pa gen order yon well.
When I retire a little honey, I am a fine man.
You are a fine man.
Yo ritiris yo or a
That's why I'm here.
I'm going to buy a dog and I'm going to come and do it with you.
If you don't get along with me, I'll be with you soon enough.
I will be there for you.
Yo pral lapèch
We're not the only ones.
How can you relate Nothing but to relate to you?
I'm going to release it.
The genye yo marin.
If you guys want to catch fish yourself, only people, they'll call you so touf.
Even if I don't have to fish.
I'm not going to fish.
This is also the case with depise too
And the sea is full of them.
I won't be at sea and I won't be at sea.
You've got a lot to do with me.
We're looking for a reason why you're going to die.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to do it again.
It's not like we're going to have a lot of fun.
There are a lot of things I can do to help you.
I've been waiting for you.
I don't know what to call it.
And then there's the fact that we're not going to be able to do anything about it.
The bay is also home to a variety of fish species.
It's the only way I'm going to get it.
Eve said yes, or no.
I'm not going to lie.
They are on a mission.
Now I can do it all again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and
Prasadou is now in bout bay and they are now in li
Byantre ladan pou l now
I thought I was there.
Nasla is the only thing that can make me feel like a practitioner.
I don't want to be the only one who doesn't want me to be the only one who doesn't want me to be the only one who doesn't want me to be the only one who doesn't want me to be the only one who doesn't want me to be the only one who doesn't want me to be the only one who doesn't want me to be the only one who doesn't want me to be the only one who doesn't want me to be the only one who doesn't want me to be the only one who doesn't want me
As if I were to say or do a survey, I knew your pen.
I'm going to take a look at the top of this thing.
I'm going to the sea and I'm going to see exactly what's going on.
I don't know if there's a new generation yet.
I'm not sure I'll ever be able to make it to the lake again.
Se brother or yo rele rele lak
Only in this way will they be relieved.
There's always something new going on here.
The good and the bad is what you're going to end up doing.
I'm going to tell you a story.
The coast of Daman is at the bottom of the sea.
The key is to release the Sanskrit version.
There's no such thing as a new generation again.
It's not that bad.
I'm going to release it.
They're still there.
Men have no choice but to do so.
any other language.
There must be more to it than that.
Sometimes you're going to send me your name.
Or send your name with a code.
or keep the code zyen.
or voyeur in the name.
We're going to send you this message.
I'm going to have to put a lot of pressure on myself and I'm going to be in Tanzen.
an an bon OK sa fit
The council will decide on the issue in a timely manner.
You're going to have to wait until the end of the day.
Good after Tanzen
If there is an order again, I can tell you.
You can't or won't.
or di Tanzen
Or they're just trying to make a difference.
Or even more.
For example, you may feel that Bèt la nan bay la Sodi l'ap fè la.
Or if you don't want to take it.
Tell me if it's the same with the nonmen.
I don't know what I'm going to do.
I'm living in the middle of nowhere.
It's not a bad thing.
What about Elijah?
Okay, so I'm going to do this.
Se zyen an, li vale, ouye, anmen, an, an, an, but it is not in the order that you can say.
Or can I do something about it?
We're going to have to do this, and we're going to have to do this.
What's going on this week?
Pvation an k ap week an, donp wou di, pvation an week an, OK, bay sa yo, nan fish yo gen an yo rele yo.
If you want to catch fish.
That's how only one person can live.
I'm going to tell you a secret about it.
What's the next big thing?
It can be a great prason chip.
Piske nou sou prason
I take it all with a grain of salt.
It can be done with human reason.
This is a picture of you.
Others follow in the footsteps of fishermen and fishermen.
And who's the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one
I don't know why I'm here.
It's worth it.
It's worth it to the people who fish for it.
Fish and i know grate and leg run.
They're like fish.
Let's take a look at what's going on here.
It's time for you to do it.
Thank you for the fish you caught.
What do you think of me?
We are in a position to do so.
I'm going to release it.
I'm going back to the good old days.
Yowon gen no yo
Yo annig mèt bon m nou ansèlman
If you want to find the equation behind li
Okay, well, what does prason know?
There's no reason I don't know.
I know the reason for this.
I've been waiting for a few miles.
Mann knows the prason marijan mann
He knows the prason of the mannet.
I don't know how many miles you've been through.
Or do it again.
Gen or pa ket se nan dò dous yo vann
I don't know.
It was Marijan, it was Manchet, it was Soujen, it was Marijan, it was my grandfather, I know.
It's a good one.
A series of fish that are washed clean with their fingers.
You are your grandchildren.
And the angel is with you.
Fish like yo
Fish like yo li chivret
Se not sa only yo pwase
Only with chivret.
I'm ready to bake them too.
We're going to have cookies.
I'm going to take everything else again.
I've got a man for you.
There's a man who can make a difference in my life.
I'm going to give you the chivret.
I'm going to give you a cookie.
There's no other way again.
They don't know who they are.
A child's debt is a debt that he or she must keep.
and keep silent.
Or keep your mouth shut.
I'm going to tell you a story.
All the children were born with a double heartedness.
I know that you're not alone.
Yo konn al kenpe kribich
Kribich ton is another type of ton.
What else?
I don't know if I know any other fish, but I do know a few miles, yes, a couple of miles, a few miles, and I don't know any other fish.
The men of my fish count la m
I'm the only one who knows if I'm going to catch my fish or if I'm going to catch my fish.
I'm going to tell you something.
Beef or fish and fish in the woukèp
Anmen after fisankò
Se lapya or gen ti lapya
After all, you don't know.
I'm going to ask you seven more questions, or I'm going to ask you seven more questions, or I'm going to ask you seven more questions, or I'm going to ask you seven more questions, or I'm going to ask you seven more questions, or I'm going to ask you seven more questions, or I'm going to ask you seven more questions, or I'm going to ask you seven more questions.
I'm very proud of the men.
I'm a fish out of water.
I've been waiting for you and I've been waiting for you and I've been waiting for you and I've been waiting for you and I've been waiting for you and I've been waiting for you and I've been waiting for you and I've been waiting for you and I've been waiting for you and I've been waiting for you and I've been waiting for you and I've been waiting for you and I've been waiting for you and I've been waiting for you and I've been waiting for you.
I'm not going to let you get away with it.
I'm going to continue to work hard.
Fishing is done in the fresh water and can be done in the fresh water.
They are in the sea until they have won their victory.
The equation is the same as that of the equation.
Enmen m good equation
I'm a few miles away.
or te bon m tout de a
I am a good Englishman.
I'm going to give you all the best I can.
I'm very happy with the result and I'm very happy with it.
M from kribich
There are many ways to make money.
There is no need for a man to cry out to him.
One of the animals in the water is called angi.
Or you're good at it.
Anmen, n ap rete sou sa nan an, other luggage.
Hey guys who know how to ride your bike, what are you doing?
Take good care of yourself and do what you need to do.
You can do it on two occasions.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
I'll let you know how it goes.
It's called a foye.
Lodi before the pearl, on the boat to the son and to the yo-yo.
Ma'am, Chaloup, is Chaloup in the mood for something new?
And, well, ever since I've been here, ever since I've been here, they've been on a boat.
Li kou on ti bout, on ti bout bwa a bon, or te kabri.
Wi, wou, kababak reyi an kouralen an yo.
If you don't want to do that, you're going to do it on a boat.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
I don't know if I'm going to make it or not.
For example, where there are too many fish or too many fish.
The fish in the river as a fish is such a thing.
fish an amount of Anfanti te
As a matter of fact, there is no reason to do so.
Prason made estalay lobo bwa
Because there are so many generations.
I'm going to say it again.
There's no reason why I shouldn't be here.
It's not like you're being baptized.
When the sun comes up.
Or something entirely new.
Everybody's going upstairs and down the stairs.
Everyone climbs up and everyone climbs up and down the stairs.
One day I'll say it again.
All the people upstairs.
All the people up here were baptized.
It's all up to a person.
I know what you're talking about.
I'm sure you'll agree with me.
Don't go up or up to the bathroom.
men or up
Everyone is going to be in the boat and everyone is going to be in the ship.
Death is the final resting place of the dead.
This is where I'm going.
When you get to the beach, you can pick up the code and use it to get to the beach.
I'm going to the river.
There's a lot of people out there who don't know who they are.
The story of batiman and the story of kochte ko
Batiman is a cause for concern.
Batiman an koze tou kan lòdi jan an pòdisa
It's okay if you pay someone who wants to do something.
It's the only thing I can do.
I'm not going to say goodbye to you, but I'm going to say goodbye to you.
Ap men level of cha doup la an an batiman Asimankiyen 2 of the people who are the people who are called Lchalo
A good man is a good man.
This is how I wrote Lchalo plak.
The men are very much in need of a man.
I'm going to tell you who I am and what I'm going to do.
You're going to have to go back to the bathroom to get a drink.
We're on the lookout for people who don't want to be on the lookout for you.
The people who don't have to deal with the debts are the ones who have to deal with the debts.
I'm going to tell you how to do it.
It's like we're going to have to make a decision.
It's not like I'm going to call it quits.
As a result, it has fallen into disrepair.
Or do you know?
Or if you're riding a horse and you're riding your beef.
I'm going to call you back.
Ramblan who knows how to call you and what to do.
I don't know what I want to do.
Either by my grandmother or by my grandmother.
Anmen yon bwa anmen yon bwa anmen yon bwa anmen yon bwa anmen yon bwa anmen yon bwa anmen yon bwa anmen yon bwa anmen yon bwa anmen yon bwa anmen yon bwa anmen yon bwa anmen yon bwa anmen yon bwa anmen yon bwa anmen yon bwa anmen yon bwa anmen yon bwa
There's no such thing as a relay.
It's not like I'm going back to the drawing board, it's like I'm going back to the drawing board, it's like I'm going back to the drawing board, it's like I'm going back to the drawing board, it's like I'm going back to the drawing board, it's like I'm going back to the drawing board, it's like I'm going back to the drawing board, it's like I'm going back to the drawing board.
They're going to rally.
Let's get to know each other.
Anmen si yo rele rele li ralen
This is why I'm here to help men.
You're not the same person.
I've been drinking wine with him.
It's good to be back.
I'm going to go back to li
I'm going back and forth.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm going to do what I want to do, and I'm going to do what I want to do.
Even if I am going to be an avenger even if I am going to be an avenger.
I don't have a pap bag.
It's only a pap bag.
I'm going to blow the whistle on the bay.
When you go to sleep with them, they will go to sleep with you.
I'm not sure if I'm ready or not.
by pramè douvan
and the ferry to the rear.
Or take it with a grain of salt.
Or at least we can sing it.
Enven, or ba la pa kon lòt non.
I'm going to call you again.
I'm going to get back to you.
I'm going to call men all over the world and reject orders again.
Other men know how to call you ralen
They are alive and well.
Okay, if you've got some fish, you've got some fish to catch, what's Madlo going to give you?
And then there was Sadim.
If you don't have a great Madlo, I'm going to fall in love with you for the rest of your life.
I'm going to tell you a story and I'm going to tell you a story.
Going up and down the highway.
Someone is going to come to you.
Or don't you know?
Gen is so small.
You've got it all together.
Is there a gene that is so small?
Li is going to Zaliza
You're in the water.
I'm not going to tell you who's going to be the best person in the world, who's going to be the best or who's going to be the best.
Is it white or white?
I'm not going to say anything about my account.
Or they'll always have a blank account.
I've always wanted to do this.
There are two main reasons why you have to be passionate about your business.
It's a way of life for people.
It's also the most beautiful place in the world where you can get rich.
Gen yon animal for example lip yo hold yo nan an
How great is it that you are able to do this or that you are able to do this in a way that creates peace and prosperity.
They crabbed, but they didn't know how to handle it.
It's like a crab.
In other words, I'm going to give you a break.
Another generation again.
We are no longer in the lake.
It's a good idea to let me know.
I'm going to tell you.
I know what I'm talking about.
I know what it's like.
Good luck to you.
I don't know if I'm going to make it.
I know I'm not a big fan, but I know I'm on the other side of things.
and crab la
I don't know how to crab too.
I don't know how to call a crab.
Even if I was a man I knew I'd heard about it.
I'm not a crab and I'm not a crab.
The men are known to have died.
It's like a piece of luggage that's made with a bunch of guys who know the keys to it.
It's cold out here.
It's cold.
I'm sorry to hear you say that.
It's cold and wet.
They're cold.
I know I've heard it all before.
The whole sea of Ari is here.
They were born with a single eye.
Who's going to take care of it?
It's so cold with the salt filler.
You've got a lot to do with it.
I'll do it with a file.
I'm going to make a movie with you.
Below the top of the towel.
Empi entered the underworld under the name of Ka
They can't be mounted.
Now I'm going to do the same thing.
I'm going to dive in.
That's the only way I can do it.
It's too late.
late or believe.
Underwater is good if the road enters underneath the woun plo rete sofè
The men were drowned.
Prepare when the child does not sink.
Stand up and be counted.
Bilfour headed under two Men's.
If you are a person, for example.
They fell into the sea.
The good news is that I won't be able to do it again.
If you don't, you're not going to get it.
It's a floating boat.
For a pack of fish.
Or to take a bath.
I'll give you a second chance to keep your pants on so long.
I'm not the only one who's been there.
The equation code of the human genome l
Let's take a look at some examples.
We're going to take care of it.
The bay is located in the sea asphalt.
It's not like I don't know how to swim in the ocean.
They have a network.
The sea or gen dware to you li
Let them pass on to you or your family.
Who knows what's going on now?
Now they know who you are.
I know what I'm doing now.
They can now know byann.
Let's give an example of how badly you're doing and how badly you're doing.
chat the maj
It's either good or bad.
If you do or don't.
We need to know what we need.
I've been skiing and skiing for a long time.
Let's not get caught up in it anymore.
I don't know if I'm going to have a good chat.
Good luck with the water supply.
The water will flow into the river as it flows, keeping them alive.
Oh, well, I'm ready for the water to run out, or I'll wait a year.
E, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o, o,
If you want to talk to a mother or put her with her, or take a chat with a man like that.
Ma or chat.
I'm going to tell you about Sarah.
Before I can say I'm going to say I'm going to say I'm going to say I'm going to say I'm going to say I'm going to say I'm going to say I'm going to say I'm going to say I'm going to say I'm going to say I'm going to say I'm going to say I'm going to say I'm going to say I'm going to say I'm going to say I'm going to say I'm going to say I'm going to say I'
I've been with you for a couple of days.
You'll be able to have a baby and talk about it in a chat room.
And I'm going to call your kids.
It's a lot of people's money.
It's all good as long as I'm here and I know what I'm doing.
If you don't, take the animal and give it to me and I'll give it to you.
I want to talk to you, and I want to talk to you, and I want to talk to you, and I want to talk to you, and I want to talk to you, and I want to talk to you, and I want to talk to you, and I want to talk to you, and I want to talk to you, and I want to talk to you, and I want to talk to you, and I want to talk to you, and I want to talk to you, and I want to talk to you, and I want to talk to you.
The genome of the expanse animal is similar to that of the male animal, but it only flies.
There are two ways to do this.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
You are abrede gen yon bèt yon rele rele frize Non
It's not like they're still here.
It is not necessary to take the animal from the ship.
On the animals they know now with your pity.
You know who you are.
Of course, of course, the beast or the mouse is the only one who knows what is going on.
It's all in your head.
It's not like I'm talking to a rat or a rat.
The good news is that there are other reasons for this.
Men who know what you're looking for.
I know where you are.
I've heard that you're not going to take no for an answer.
Don't be afraid to put yourself in a position where you don't know what you're talking about.
I can't tell you if the animal is still alive.
I'm going to have a chat or a chat with you.
Gen chòt souwi or gen chòt souwi
You don't know.
It's not my fault or my fault.
Animals, for example, live in the presence of angels or angels.
It's not even a chat room.
Dekonsay only yo rele li
Between the two of them, there's a lot going on.
I'm going to call an angel or call you.
Your children will have your children.
I'm going to try and eat it.
There is no doubt about it.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do next.
I know what I'm going to do.
If you are an accountant, then you are a poor person.
If you are an accountant.
Si an kont nevele
Gen yon bet, for example.
I know I'm going to love you.
They will love your soul.
I'm going to tell you a story.
There is an animal that knows how to walk your braw, but there is one.
It's your animal.
As the gen san several tibetan Nan se nan madlo yo same anon
I know you.
You are new to me.
We're going to do it again.
It was a time when we knew we were going to do everything we could.
Ap fouye twouye nan tou yo remain you.
I know now that I'm planting a plant and I'm releasing it.
Now I'm going to call you again.
I know that two people will be there for you.
You don't know what you're getting yourself into.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do next.
What's the matter with you?
There are a number of yen available.
It comes in a variety of colors.
Gen tou color
For example, a child is born with a
I'm going to give you the phone pack and the wire to tell you that you're an angel.
Do you think it's too late to win, but it's too late to win?
Okay, well, here's the general thesis.
Something or something like that.
I don't know what you mean by "scopyon".
Do you even know how I was born?
There's a grandpa in the back when I finish in the front not in front of the fly, there's a grandpa in the back.
Okay, if we don't have time, or time, or time, or time, or time, or time, we don't have time, we don't have time.
E okriyet, son sa a la, or so you are in demand of anbaraj.
I'm so sorry to hear that you're in trouble.
I told him I was banned from the bar.
Beasts that have not yet been deposited are now in danger of extinction.
I'm going to fight for the men's team.
I know that there are people who like to think about their lives.
I don't know who you are, I don't know who you are.
It's not like you're going to be able to pick up the pieces.
I know who you are.
Let's get back to your other questions.
Your other questions will not be deposited or deferred.
Gen one dyèpan yo Gen yon another ti gyèp
He preached in the Spanish language.
You've got a lot of Spanish.
They say it's too late.
I'm a little tired of the fever.
You, everything is the same.
Okay, well, you've got to be on the same page with all the kids.
I'm sure you'll be able to see the other side of it, but I'm sure you'll be able to see the other side of it.
It's the same as the original.
I've always had a hard time getting to know people.
It's a good man, but it's also a pity.
gwen or the bet.
I don't know if you've ever had a foot in the door before.
You're going to have to code for it.
I'm sure you'll be able to use it.
I've always wanted to do something like this.
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to do that again.
It's not just animals that have a mother tongue, a mother tongue, a mother tongue, a mother tongue, a mother tongue, a mother tongue.
They are too small.
It's about a mile away.
It's about how many miles it takes to get there.
I'm not going to lie to you.
A mile up or a mile.
It's about a mile up the road.
They know what they're doing.
Beasts that have made the mileage.
and a white horse.
Men, yeah, what's the big deal?
Can you tell me, what's the big deal?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
If it's on the planch, what is it?
Well, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going to hit you, I'm going
M ap frape potou a.
If you don't have a seat, I'll call you, they'll fall!
It's like I'm dying.
Or I'll tell you what to do about the mileage.
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to get a balloon.
You can take the debay so you can put it together.
You know what I mean.
E, I don't know whether, or I'll see how I do it.
Bèt la son
They will know one or two of these animals.
And then there's the whole thing.
On the other hand, you have to pay attention to what you're doing.
They call it chwal.
It is possible that they will fall.
It's okay with the other gen nou an an as yo
It's okay to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be the one who's going to be
It's time to go back to the genome again.
We have not ascended into heaven.
Gen an as bonje
You don't know anything about men.
The person or thing I'm talking about is the person who knows what I'm talking about.
The men were there for a year.
I'm more likely to meet Bèt sa yo Soudo
Suddenly, Suddenly, Suddenly, how do you feel?
Well, if you're going to call Kounyam, I'm going to tell you, what's going on?
You're the reason I'm here.
Let's get to know each other.
It's a train ride.
It's the first time anyone has ever heard of Tibet, and it's the first time they've heard of it.
I've heard briy ap ask if you're going to be able to do it.
It's not like it's not going to happen.
I don't want to see you now.
The chain of pi is known to be the same as the chain of pi.
The question is whether such a thing is true or not.
It's not just me, it's you, it's me.
Men, what are you doing?
Well, I'm not playing cricket.
If I'm Abdou, if I'm going to sleep in my room, why don't we stay?
I'm playing cricket for you.
I've seen a lot of lights like this and I'm flying.
I'm going to teach you a lesson.
Gonse ride out of darkness and I know the packaging of animals and the color of your head.
I'm going back again.
It's hard to believe that we've seen things before.
They're the only ones there are.
It's a very short story.
I'm not going to do it again.
Or you can do two things.
Or you can find them in a short amount of time.
It was a time when we had no choice but to talk to each other.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
I'm here to help you.
The animals can live in the same place as the calons, and they need to eat too much.
Now all calteya
Jan yo rele w.
Other animals don't know how to ride on their own.
There is no new generation again.
It's not like you're going to be able to keep up with yourself.
There is no one to blame for this.
One of the animals.
It's a lot of fun.
How do you know how to read?
I'm going to try to make it work.
I don't know how I'm going to be able to do it.
or yo easily isil
You're the kind of guy who can't read a book.
You will be rewarded for your service.
It's not about the animals and the animals themselves.
One of the animals is preske's soul.
One of the animals that can see the person is preske.
I can't tell you who I am.
Yo di a lanon m.
I can't wait to see it.
I'm not the only one who's been deactivated.
Do not carry luggage or anything else.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much for your help.
Alò chefal la t ap bèt la t ap anwye non la
I can't wait to get my hands on it.
Thank you very much.
Don't worry about it.
That's how I redeemed myself.
I'm going to redeem it.
It's not just me, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me.
And I'm talking about people and things I'd like to do with me again.
Make sure everyone knows what you're getting yourself into, and that's a great package to bring.
I'm going to give you a shot of what I know to do.
But now I know I'm not going to make it.
Chan ki san is not a
Don't be fooled by this.
I know the voice of Chan.
Is that true?
I don't know anything about it.
I'm going to tell you about it.
If you can hear me, you can hear me.
Bet sa a ye chanwan
Chanwan chanwon wè mutè know ni men se se pran dan nan nan m bat wè well san m ap drink l ap ap tovini ap tibrèl
Bon y ap gen autre nou again
Se chanwon only has the right to be heard by the people and the animals.
Do you know whether or not there will be a series of debates?
The account will not be deleted and you will not be able to purchase it until you have given birth to your child.
I don't know you.
They're in the middle of nowhere.
Se mat mwazèl yo rele yo beast la l
It's a bit of a blast from the past.
You've got a lot of freedom in your life.
If you are not able to produce a child, you will be able to reap the benefits.
I know how to watch a story even when it comes to drinking and chandeliers.
It's a big deal that I know everything about.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do this right away.
I'm here to help you.
The gravitational pull of the plane.
It's the kind of thing I know.
What I'm going to do is make sure I'm ready for it.
or by Mwazél
And I'm going to meet you again.
I'm going to look for Mwazèl.
One way or the other.
Son of a bitch.
I'm going to count on you.
You're not going to be able to keep up with what's going on.
One look at Mwazèl
If m is equal to 1
It's all about the contents.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it until I'm able to make it.
One day, we'll have a new account.
I don't know what to look at.
or pa kon non beast yo relay so isi
You don't know what to do.
gwen de mwè was born.
gwen de mwè and limwazell
When I was born.
How I was born.
Regen was elected to the Senate.
gwen fish releases in muzel
Men or women should be treated equally as men or women.
or know nonman
Men know nonman men
Men don't know whether or not it's true.
The same thing or the same thing.
Now I'm in the middle of something.
For example, when you plant a plant.
You've got to play with the gen zèv and you've got to play with the pike.
When I'm in the mood, I'm fine.
We're going to have to make sure that the zip code is unlocked.
But you know who I am.
You don't know me.
Yes, it is flamanch.
And so they called me "Flemish".
I know it's Flemish.
I'm going to put you on the spot.
This is why we're here today, and we're here today, and we're here today, and we're here today, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here, and we're here.
I'm going to tell you.
Good news again, I'm not going to lie.
Form an even toukou
I'm so glad you're here with me.
Because it is of interest to me to give advice.
Besyon gen all those who know.
Wherever you are, it's better than anything you know.
It's a good idea to pay the bills.
I've always wanted to pay my bills.
And I put together a package of things to do with it.
It's the first time I've ever had a birthday.
I don't know what I'm going to do, but I know what I'm going to do.
Se nan pay kay only yo rete nan on the epoch
I don't know what to do with myself.
I know how to enter here at la
If you don't know what I'm eating, don't worry.
Beasts have a right to be seen as one of the most beautiful animals in the world.
Kay yon pay vroman
The teeth are very sharp.
In a nutshell.
It will be too much to understand my own mind or my own place or even my own fatigue.
Myen tèt ou an plas pou konn sa m nou la Sa or beast as if i were to double on kay anpay
In other words, it's not just about you, it's about you, it's about you, it's about you, it's about you, it's about you, it's about you, it's about you, it's about you, it's about you, it's about you, it's about you, it's about you, it's about you, it's about you, it's about you, it's about you, it's about you, it's about you, it's about you,
I know I'm going to have to change my mind, but I'm just going to have to change my mind.
But it's not like I'm going to be able to do it for eleven years.
Don't be fooled into thinking it's too late.
Your soul is unable to speak.
It's not your fault.
They're everywhere.
They know what to do about it.
The men who do the same thing are not the ones who do the same thing.
They don't even know where they are coming from and they don't even know where they are going.
They know how to enter the night, and they know how to enter the night, and they know how to travel.
Ap rele nan zòrèyoun
Recognition is also the same.
I know how to get in your boat.
The leaders of the people are the rulers of the people.
I can't wait to see what's new.
We don't want to fall into the trap.
The more you fall, the more you slip, the more you see.
It's the wording.
The person who is ill knows no rest for the sake of sanjay.
You've got a lot to do with it.
This is how salt mann releases salt.
OK, palèv, gen koulèv li an nou di, good.
Or to win another cup of coffee.
Gen koulèv flambo again
You're going to fall into your shoes.
Now run to the other side.
And now you're running away from the other side of the world.
For a brother Moutifrè I mandate you to give me your blessing in the face of adversity.
Good branch mango and apouche m on other feet candey la epi
Other men were buried underneath.
I'm going to tell you that someone else is going to kill your child, and I'm going to tell you that I'm going to kill your child.
I don't know the answer to that question.
There is not a single person who can tell me about my past or tell me a lot of things that have happened.
So many things have happened so many things have broken down in the block.
Many animals have died.
He fell into the constancy of Obezou to break.
I'm sure you'll be able to see more and more of me.
Okay, dop or nothing else.
Is it too high or too low, so how can I get back?
Nan, an, yon Seba.
We've heard that you're not going to be able to do anything new, new and exciting.
Jenn, this young man, who is Sheba?
One accident can tell you a story about an accident that happened to me when I was a kid.
This is the road leading to Sengam.
It's not exactly the same as the machine itself.
I'm going to sleep in the men's room.
I'm going to save the men I'm going to save.
Even if it's not, there's a lot more to it than that.
It's not just me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you, it's you
Comedy, comedy, entertainment or ten, if they say so, you won't be disappointed.
There are so many people.
Li Bon zil concede bout bon mesi se ki ki dou doke
The other wife is also on the case.
I've been trying to figure out what to do with my machine.
You don't have to spend a lot of time with your grandmother or anyone else who has the same bed or anything.
There are a lot of people who live in the same neighborhood.
I've been on a list of people who have helped me in the past.
Or do I have to go to the bathroom?
How can I say, on the one hand or on the other hand, that I am not talking to you and that I am not talking to you?
It's not like I don't want people to know.
There are people who don't know what they're talking about.
I don't know who you are.
You know how it is.
I can't wait to hear about it.
Or on someone who is looking for a place else in the world.
I'm going to tell you a story about a man or a woman who's not a man or a woman.
Take a look at what you've been up to.
Either way, I'm talking about a cow, or I'm talking about a cow, or I'm talking about a cow, or I'm talking about a cow, or I'm talking about a cow, or I'm talking about a cow, or I'm talking about a cow, or I'm talking about a cow, or I'm talking about a cow, or I'm talking about a cow, or I'm talking about a cow, or I'm talking about a cow.
Is there a soul or a soul that has died, or is there a soul that will die?
If I were to die, I would die.
I've lost a lot of money from my grandmother's website.
I'm going to die.
It's not the way to go.
I'm going to die.
I've never had a person with whom I'd like to share tools.
Or need to tell them.
There is no such thing as a website without the same tools.
Or your pride.
Or just walk, or two, yo vin mando how or two walk, or soye a hoy a solozòt ap de.
Ap di mache abel.
For example, if a good person is a good person, that person is a bad person.
Or you can't take the child or you need to call someone else for help.
I'm the only one who can stop crying.
This is the only way to get rid of them.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to keep up with the kids.
You can't even have children and grandchildren.
I'm going to bring you a pen to pen you in.
Do you want to open up your account to my slaves?
Put your tab on it.
On the day of the child's birth, if he or she is sick, he or she is a slave.
You can't do that.
Take a look at two of the gardens.
I'm going to give you a loan if you need it.
You don't need to tell me what's going on.
You're not going to be able to do anything about it.
I'm not going to let you get away with it.
That's what's going to happen.
A person who asks you to decree your epiphany
I'm going to have to decrease it.
What do you think of me?
Sou te gen 2 plate nanmen ou, anmou ap mande or pou pou plate for tou de plat, underpral di l.
Okay, if someone is there.
Children's creativity is also at the forefront of creation.
A man or a woman can take a child.
A child's body was created to take care of them.
I'm going to tell you about it.
When I was a kid, I went to the bathroom.
Adminadi men are the ones who will not be relieved.
to remen or besyon devin pran yo li
I can't wait to see who you are.
I've been waiting for you to tell me what happened.
Rap your employee's son.
They are rappers and rappers.
Tell your children that you are going to be able to help them.
It's too late for that.
Men's clothing and accessories are also available.
Pa isanp or win 2 pen sou tablam
If I don't know where I'm going, what will I do?
I'm going to write you a letter.
You're also sick.
If you ask questions about your children.
Don't be afraid to ask for help.
My children need to know that they are not my children.
He is also known for his hard-hitting and uncomfortable routines.
Take a look at them.
They're taking on things.
I don't know if a man's wife will take the money.
Or you need to be able to use it to get it right.
It's going to be a hell of a lot of fun.
Or two lalin
They need to be lifted.
Ap is for men.
It can be as simple as you think.
If you're a man, if you're a man, if you're a man, if you're a man, if you're a man, if you're a man, if you're a man, if you're a man, if you're a man, if you're a man, if you're a man, if you're a man, if you're a man, if you're a man, if you're a man, if you're a man, if you're a man, if you're a man,
I'm not going to say goodbye or anything.
They need to be worn out.
I'm going to tell you a lot about it.
Your people are a beast.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
You need to tell them.
Both men are savres of the cabrit Wòp di Wòp di Wòp di jenn langi Non
It's only for young people.
jennou beast la di Pa di beast annig jennou
A young man of eleven friends with whom he has a great friendship, will he come?
If you want to come, where do you want to come with your friends?
A friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of
Okay, so if you're a friend, why don't you come and be friends?
When a friend of mine came to see me, I asked him if he would come.
It's hard to know if we're going to stop or avoid it.
If you're going to take a bite out of a mango, or you're going to take a bite out of a mango, or you're going to take a bite out of a mango, or you're going to take a bite out of a mango.
And the person who is known to take it is the one who takes it.
Or need to tell me what I need or need.
Bon wap start the sentence with my mango
If you don't have or need an epi
I'm sorry about that.
or on another leg.
Or I could say: we've got a lot going on.
It's a great place to ban men.
I'm going to tell you a great story.
It can be banned.
And why did he lose his way in the first place?
Soubezhen is closing its doors.
The bank is closed.
or will be present in the future.
In order for people to be able to do something about it, they will be able to do something about it.
I'm sure you'll be happy with it.
What do you mean?
Pwadi m, will you be healthy?
Wi men, and souve jedi sant lab Aken, how will you say there?
Write, for example, a person's card is a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a mountain and a
If, for example, you have a friend, or you have a friend with whom you have a good relationship.
I'd like to introduce you to a friend who's a good friend.
I'll let you know how it goes.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
For example, I'll call you back or ask you if you're ready.
I'm going to tell you about it.
Ap of a friend of mine.
I can't order it or say it again.
He has no new friends.
Ask a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend of a friend
I've been to London for a while now.
But if you're a friend of yours, you're not going to be able to see it.
Appears to be friends with them.
You won't be able to show me what you're looking for, and you won't be able to show me what you're looking for.
It's not that simple.
As Ali Mèt sou tab la
The men of the grandparents.
There are three ways to get to one of them.
The children are besyon Ali Mèt epi
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
It's the only thing I can do, and it's the only thing I can do, and it's the only thing I can do, and it's the only thing I can do, and it's the only thing I can do, and it's the only thing I can do.
E chen chen in front of the door, e chen in front of the door or, ap an.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to pull this off myself.
They're on the net.
A good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good man is a good
I'm going to tell you something.
I'm going to tell you about Chen An.
This is not a complete list.
I'm not sure what to say.
I don't know what you're talking about.
If there is a lot of mangoes in front of the door.
We're not the only ones.
I'm going to tell you about the road to Nice.
Or you can't take it.
It's up to you.
What are you singing about?
It's not like I know who you are or where you want to be.
It's either one or the other.
Do you know how much you're worth?
It's like the old man's house.
Or need to give it to you now
One of the main reasons for this is that it's not easy.
Thank you very much.
Good chat with her and her family.
We're going to chat now and then.
How can you do this?
We're not talking to you.
Where do you want to be?
When the sun goes down, there will be men, a, dakou.
Bachas sunset or bachas sunset
or bachas the sunset
I can't talk to you right now.
And now I'm on my way.
If you're going to talk to me, I'm going to talk to you.
Men or women are not allowed to chat with their children.
I'm going to chat with you.
Can you say yes?
chat la yo
The chat room is where you are.
You can't do that anymore.
Or win 1 chen per two.
In the meantime, you'll be able to put everything in place to help you.
I'm going to try to make things better.
Or else they're an alcoholic.
What can you do?
We are going to start at the beginning of the year and we are going to start at the beginning of the year.
Now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now,
W ap start at the very beginning.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
It's not a new thing.
Or gen dechen in front of the potou
Or you need a lot of money to get a drink.
You will be rewarded with non chen an.
There's a lot more to it than that, okay, e si m di, e gen dechen!
Gen de chen e la, m di chen sa an drinkyan do you know how to chen m ap pale?
Do you know what I'm talking about, do you know what I'm talking about, what I'm doing?
Do you have the right to drink, drink, drink, or drink?
He knows how to cut his hair.
Do I know how to chat with them and help them?
I don't know what to say.
I don't know if I'm new or not.
I know I've changed the way I've met you.
Li donki met any other animal to put another animal in my pocket.
If you're looking for an animal, you'll meet li, an, an, dapò.
Chatting on the internet.
They are now even able to bay a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a
Do you think I'm going to do this?
Chatting around here is the only thing I can do for you.
Wisdom or wisdom is the only thing I can say to you.
Yon chat nou lakou a gen yon chat nou lakou a
Or maybe you'll find out if you're going to be able to do it.
Or chat as if we can't get enough of them.
Gen yon ga did not see it.
Se chen or sob di
The men of Chen Sa can't tell you what to do.
or tooth whitening.
Men or women who have been abducted by aliens.
Or do you know what's going on?
You need to know if chen pa w w k ap japye
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it to Japan.
If you want to know more about it, you can do it yourself.
That's why I'm laughing at you.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
Se de chen or gen
In the meantime, we're on our way.
If you want to know more about it, you can do it.
This is a new generation.
You need to know if you're also interested.
I'm going to be the chief chef.
If you're a chef, you're going to have to pay a fee.
It's the same with Li Tou.
If you're going to be a chef, you're not going to be a chef.
al kabann o
It's a great way to get to know each other.
It's not like I'm sleeping in bed.
Men are not allowed to go to their beds.
It's time to move on.
There are two types of men.
The ban was lifted in a few days.
It's not like we're going to be able to keep up with them.
I'm going to tell you what to do.
It's a great way to get a feel for yourself and your family.
I don't know my mother.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
Etan I'm going to do the same thing.
I ran away from them.
It's a great way to get in touch with your friends.
I'm sure you'll be able to get a copy of it.
w ap di cabrit
kabrit li k lage
kabrit tit lage
If it is a potion, then it is a potion.
One can or can't.
You can have a good time and you can have a good time.
I need a mother or a father.
I'm going to give you a little bit of advice.
I'm going to find you.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to wash my face.
You've got to get to the bottom of it.
Gen de pochon kochon yo n se se se se can see
I don't know what to say to your mom or dad.
I can't wait to hear about it.
If you can't do that, you can do that.
Your mother or mother's mother is your mother's daughter.
Or you need to let me know if the cochon is there.
With this coat on the back, how can I do it?
MEN, either believe or believe or say you can't believe it, or if you don't know what you're talking about.
It's not as good as I thought it would be.
Or we can understand the key to your success.
I'm not sure about that.
If we don't have anything new, if we don't have anything new, we won't have anything new.
If you're going to win, if you're going to win, if you're going to win again, you're going to have to win two games.
It's too late for that.
My mom and dad are all over the place.
The privandye se kochon pas and the first seo seo la de de segundo seo la o t lage
There is no such thing as a complete list.
It's not a full-length novel.
Pass me by and I'll let you go.
There are two types of coconut oil that can be used in coconut oil.
I'd like to ask her how she interacted with me.
How do I know if the cochon passes in the same way?
They don't know how to do it, they don't know how to do it, they don't know how to do it, they don't know how to do it, they don't know how to do it, they don't know how to do it, they don't know how to do it, they don't know how to do it, they don't know how to do it, and they don't know how to do it.
If there is only one cochon
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
The good news is that you're doing well.
They're good to go.
The mother of the child is a cowardly woman.
It's a new way of looking at things.
Now we can talk about a man with only one cochon.
I can't live with my mother.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
I can't wait to see my mom.
Yon tyan difisi gref fwon ti gade whit
I asked him if he could win.
Se Jojwap is like an an
I'm not going to say anything about it.
I don't know if I can do it.
Se kochon nou ant lage.
Listen carefully to what I'm saying.
with my mother.
Then I asked him if he needed to be with me and let me go.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do this again.
It's not just that I'm not a motherfucker, it's just that I'm not a motherfucker.
I'm sure you'll find it outside.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
I'll tell you what to do next.
Don't get me wrong, I don't want to be the only one who doesn't understand.
Or maybe it's my mother.
I'm not the only one who's done this.
Or rather, I'm the one who's going to make the most of it.
en kochon o an lage a member
Kochon o an lage an menm
I have something to celebrate.
Let's take the children as an example.
Sevana doesn't want to be a man.
The plea is not binding.
Or need to tell someone else Sevana to do the same thing.
w ap di Sevana
I don't know what to do with myself.
It's my mother.
Or do you need it?
The menman li
Fana se wè epontans or di
What's the reason?
If you come to someone in a pocket, a pocket, a pocket, a pocket, a pocket, can you tell me where you want to go?
I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, or I'm not going to tell you.
Give someone or something to do.
men or need to end up with a ponytail.
I'm not sure I'll ever be able to do it.
You've got a lot of confidence in me.
I can't live without my job or anyone else.
Epi, or two if it happens, what's up?
When I get there, is your dad coming, or is he coming?
It's your turn!
Well, if it's on the screen, or it's on the screen, or it's going to be somewhere far away.
Or do I need to go back to work, as if I were going back to work?
I'm not saying you can't do that.
If you don't know who's coming, I'll be with you.
Or do something that's not going to happen.
Or from the top of the tops.
One question is whether or not the site has been updated for the next few years.
It's not easy to make a living from it.
Take, for example, the use of water in a finite container.
I'm going to the garden.
I'll tell you what I can do before I leave.
There are two different ways to do this.
It's going to be the end of it.
or pran lejade
There are two people in front of the door.
Or at least I'm the one who needs me and I'm the one who needs you.
Two people are either in or out.
Where are you going?
Who are you?
How many of these people do I have to give to you?
Who is condemning you to death, who is condemning you to death?
I don't know if I'm a man or even a woman.
I'm sure you'll find yourself ahead of the curve.
I'm in such a hurry.
There is no such thing as a free lunch or a free lunch if you can't afford it.
These men are such men.
But there's no such thing.
I want you to know that you can't keep it from men.
The men are now arriving.
or gen yon se w
They don't know if it's coming out.
Or the people who love you and are with you.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
Ann ale avè ou
derived with l ann.
It's either good or bad.
Ann ale o byen
ann or derivative.
I don't know if I'll ever be able to do that.
I don't know what they're talking about.
One of the most important things is that you are not alone.
I'm going to tell you something.
Your experience will be so great that you can bring it to the table.
You can't or won't.
You're not going to bring me here and you're not going to bring me here.
It's not like that.
Or someone who knows how to get the most out of it.
They don't know.
There will be a series of people who will take part in it.
There are two types of people you can understand.
I'm going to have to check it out.
Men can or can't.
As a person who is or can be.
Wwen mache a two pons pill
along with others who are with you or with you.
How much or how much do you believe?
Everyone says you're a prostitute.
Do you want me to follow you?
Men like you and I can't afford to lose weight.
I'm going to get rid of them.
Gansou can be used by people.
They're in the middle of it.
Do you hear or can you give an example of a plant?
or passing any pass.
Well, whatever it is, or whatever it is.
It's a good thing you're here.
Or whatever it is.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
or passing any of the above.
Let's go to the plantation.
on pa t ap.
Obezwen knows where I am now.
I'm very proud of you.
I'm going to go back to the drawing board and I'm going back to the drawing board and I'm going back to the drawing board and I'm going back to the drawing board and I'm going back to the drawing board and I'm going back to the drawing board and I'm going back to the drawing board and I'm going back to the drawing board and I'm going back to the drawing board and I'm going back to the drawing board and I'm going back to the drawing board and I'm
After two weeks, I'll be back.
I'm going to tell you what to do.
The souls of the people are filled with joy.
It's the first time I've seen it.
It's good for you and your family.
on people with disabilities who are unable to walk for a long time.
I know what I'm going through and I'm not going through it.
I don't know what I'm going to do with my life or what I'm going to do with my life.
I'm going to the South again.
I'm sure you'll be on the lookout for someone else.
Or do you know?
Or do you know, for example, whether it is an intangible asset or an intangible asset?
I don't know.
I hit soap to li kiyès or da
They're either going to die or they're going to die.
The kiboud is a.
on who's doing it.
You're going to have to do it.
Men, do you need to go back twice, or do you need to know if the app is coming back?
Can you tell me how short it is?
In order to get back to where I am now, do I need to know if I can get back to where I am?
Are you back?
How soon will you be back?
I can't wait to see you soon.
Payishan t la
It's just a matter of getting to know each other.
Or, at the very least, the man's face.
Men know who they are, or who they are.
I'm fine with it, but I know what I'm talking about.
I've never heard of such a person.
For example, let's say something happens.
What do you know about these people?
That's why I'm using it.
What do you say or do you say?
When I'm done with it, I'm done with it.
Or two of them.
Or need to win someone who will win the fight.
Or if you don't want to hear from me, I'll tell you.
We've got a lot of things going on here.
Genda di non yon men or men
The number of people in the country is very high.
To whom do you want to go, and to whom do you want to go?
Anyone who encounters you can't even talk to you.
It's not just me, it's you, it's me, it's you.
There are two types of radiation.
Who or what is the reason for the silence of the students?
It's a great feeling for those who hear you coming.
Whereas, I would like to answer a question or answer a question or answer a question or answer a question or answer a question.
Or don't complain about it too much.
Or directed by Takade.
If you ask me to answer, I will answer.
There are people who work for you.
Epi or table work is carried out in advance of
Or I'll say that in a nutshell.
A table or a table for me.
Or do something.
Yo gen yon bay and ap ba w
The men of Yon Bay la
It's a two-way street.
What's in it for you?
Do not be afraid of men.
One of the most important things I've ever seen is that I'm not alone.
It's not a good idea for me.
There's only one thing you can do about it.
Gen be la men
There's only one way to do this.
I'm not sure about that either.
They're not on my desk.
I won't be able to get married again.
It's not on my desk.
Or do it again.
Or do it and work.
There are people who work for the company.
It's a concert with you.
If you don't mind, I can tell you something.
I don't know if the two buildings have the same image.
So, who's on the table, should we pay for it?
We're going to pay for it, don't we?
You don't want to do the work you want to do.
If you look at the people who work behind the scenes, you'll see what's going on.
You don't want to be with someone.
It's not just me, it's Chanm.
I'm not sure if I'm ready for it.
I don't know if it's true or not.
It's not like we don't know what's going on.
Israel is not alone.
iswa w ap tim lan
Sa pa kinal
It is possible to use the kinal function.
I know why you're so good at it.
For others, it's a sad day.
They understand how much they can do about it.
O brezen make me know that there is a lot of sadness and sadness in men's lives.
I'm going to tell you about it.
It's a lot of fun, but it's a lot of fun.
I'm going to try to make it to the end of the day.
It's not like I'm talking about a Kinen.
You're the only one in Mankou as well as the only one in Kinen.
I'm not going back to Kinen.
I'm not going to get married again, or I'm going to get married again, or I'm going to get married again, or I'm going to get married again, or I'm going to get married again, or I'm going to get married again, or I'm going to get married again, or I'm going to get married again, or I'm going to get married again, or I'm going to get married again, or I'm going to get married again, or I'm going to get married again, or I'm going to
I don't know what to do with myself.
Take, for example, Rivan Kote.
I'm in the middle of something now when I'm all set.
For example, where I was born, I was born.
E or beswen as if m ta do
It's time for me to touch it.
There is a release of m.
I'm going to do it.
If someone makes a passionate, short-handed glove under a blanket.
Liquor is also available.
It's a lot of people who can't afford it.
God bless you.
I'm not going to say goodbye to my dad.
They cut their throats.
They cut their hair but they didn't know what to do with it.
The good people who love you now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now,
It is difficult or necessary to say as if they are much smaller in size.
They kill themselves.
Don't tell me you need someone you love very much.
It's the end of December.
If I had to, if I had to do it all over again, would I still love you?
It's the first time I've seen it.
For example, you have a glass of wine.
before or before leaving.
De jou or enabled or epi
That's the way it is.
The good people who are so e e pa w ap exit
It's either that or even that.
If there is nothing I can say, I will say it.
I'm still waiting for the gas.
OK, but we can't afford it.
Anmen or te gade deja w ap di
It's not like I've been there before.
It doesn't matter whether or not it's true.
I can't wait to see what happens next.
I'm going to say a word.
However, you may need to say yes or no to your child in order to do so.
In addition to others, there is no such thing as a free lunch.
We're going to have to find out what's going on, and we're going to have to find out what's going on.
There are people who need help.
Yes, we all want to live on the same path as we did when we bought it.
Many people are interested in buying things.
I don't know how to pronounce it.
Or even to the point of knowing the price.
Or without men of as if it were tankan Kote kavenn moun di Lika
There are only two of them.
It's almost as if I'm going to tell the people I know what they're going to do.
I've seen it before, but I don't know where it's coming from.
Or do or boast.
I'll tell you what I'm going to do next.
I'm going to start from scratch.
I'm going to come out.
Let's take an example.
Onmoun de w thus
Everything is going to happen here and there.
I'm going to tell you.
They're going to have to come up with something new.
For example, do you have E?
I'm the only one who can do this.
I'll tell you what I need to know.
Or not at all.
I can't tell you who I am or what I'm going to tell you.
madou or sobe zan vitan
Or you can say I'm sorry.
Bon pa gen lòdichon or it will come again
It's a lot of money to give to someone.
This is the first time I've seen you.
A lot of money or need to know or be able to make a lot of money.
I'm not sure about that.
No, or even in need, or in need, or with a lot of money to give.
There are a lot of copies for you.
Or I can't afford to pay for it.
I want to know more about you too.
I don't know if I can afford to pay my grandmother's bills.
We are in the midst of Daniel's persecution.
It's okay if I agree.
I'm going to get a good look at the jans.
W ap di l
I'm not a man of my dreams.
or pa vle di non men.
Don't answer that question in the first place.
There's a lot of money to be made.
I don't know anything about it.
I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results.
There's a lot of money to be made.
There's a lot of money to be made.
Or how long?
Sou or rangou la
Or re-create your mother or grandmother.
Or besyen now
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
I'm going to tell you.
Or by someone else's side.
I'm going to do something about it.
It's not like I'm doing anything wrong.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I'm not sure what I can do about it.
Why can't I do this?
There's nothing I can do about it.
It's the only thing I can do.
You can't do that.
You can't stop me from doing something new.
I can't have children now.
Decorate the gold plate.
I'm flat white.
If you are a good person for example
I've been waiting for you.
They're going to be up there.
They don't even know what else to do.
The good news is that people don't want to come to them and pass them by.
They say it's okay.
It's not like I don't want to change my mind.
I'm going to tell you about it.
Fresh wine is sexy.
Or maybe you can give me some new wine.
I've just made some wine.
It's a great way to get outdoors and outdoors.
I've been working with Bel Rag.
I've been waiting for you to come up with something new.
If you want to know how much money you have, or if you want to withdraw your money, you have to pay a lot of money.
Or put on a travari rad
It's one of my favourites.
I'm going to do something about it.
I'm going to do the radar on my own.
The currency is either re-traded or withdrawn from circulation.
Mwen esparad mout rad toumen
I'm on my way to you.
I've got a bagal and I've got a genie.
This is the only way to get rid of rad toumen mwen
There is no doubt that you will be able to enjoy the garden.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
If you're going to do that, you're going to have to pay for it.
If you're a person who doesn't exist, then you're a person who doesn't exist.
I don't really know who I am.
The leaf on the leaf is thus epi
Li vin dakou with o nan
I don't want to be a model.
Do you really know what you're talking about right now?
Who can love me?
The one who is silent is quiet.
I didn't do anything about it.
It's not like you're going to be able to pull the trigger.
They are finely decorated with man's wine.
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
The child is either born before or after the birth of the child.
The child is taken.
The power of the child.
Why can't you come back again?
It's the first time I've seen it.
I'm with you on this one.
Who's going to say a?
There is a difference between men and women.
You need to act as if you're telling or knowing that it's true as if it's someone else's fault.
As a friend of mine, I'm not the only one.
I can't wait to see what you've got in store for me.
di: an pop
They're right there with me.
They're the only ones.
What kind of cell can you call it?
They won't be able to speak their minds again.
We're going to have to do it again.
It's a good idea to ask someone to do something if it's not done well.
I'm not here right now.
That's what I'm doing now.
It's still a good thing to do now.
If so, is there anyone who can help me?
I'm going to tell you what I love.
If you're looking for a solution, you'll want to know about it.
They are able to make a living from it.
I don't know what to do with myself.
For example, if you have someone who is going to be your partner.
I don't want to eat again.
It's like I'm going to die.
I'm going to have to go back to the drawing board.
They're not going to take the road, they're not going to take the road.
I'm one of those guys, as if I'm giving it to you.
They're on the road.
They have given Chapou an epi.
Chapou a pa has lost As men if seye l beye l beye l age
It's the same person.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it home.
I've got a lot of L cards.
The card is to be kept at home.
Whether or not they will stay at home or not, they will stay at home.
w ap di o o
I don't want to forget anything at home.
I'm not sure if I'm home or not.
If you ask for an exon for the good of the country, you can break it down.
You're coming right now.
I don't think we need it anymore.
I'm very happy with the way it turned out.
It's not like I'm working for someone else.
Or you want me to know about the genome.
Or you want to let me know as if I can work.
I want to make money in the world.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do with it.
Or two socks in l...
I'm not going to lie to you.
W prot work for the gen najan chon
I don't know what to say.
For example, if you're an adult, or if you're an adult, you're an adult.
We all know what's going on here.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
It's the same with respect to the people who live here.
Take a breath of fresh air.
Deconstructing and toning people's tones.
on children at ekganp
on chen ap now
Soap is what they say.
Li pa nok of chen an
Or want to do it now.
chen an ouve m ouve
I want to be able to talk to you.
I'm going to tell you what to do next.
Or you have words to say.
But I'm still going through it.
I've come to the conclusion that I'm not.
If you are a man or a woman, you are a man.
Do or don't pass by when a car drives around you.
As a matter of fact, I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it myself or not.
They're going to kill me in the car.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
I'm a big man and I don't know what to do with myself.
Okay, I know what I'm hearing, I know what I'm hearing, I know what I'm hearing, I know what I'm hearing, I know what I'm hearing, I know what I'm hearing, I know what I'm hearing, I know what I'm hearing, I know what I'm hearing.
I've never heard of you like this before.
You've got to be in the lap of it.
It's not like I've been there before.
I've become so much more than that.
I'm going to take a look at the sea.
Or I'll take the gene gwen where I left it for you.
You have the right to plant a series of debatables.
I know how to redeem myself.
I redeemed you by the sea.
On the bay I look for the la
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
Everywhere I went I planted a plant on this hill.
I'm going to release the men.
I don't know.
An, or a person who is an or full of ladies, or a person who is below the age of majority, or a person who is below the age of majority.
It's not like that.
What is it like to live in the mountains?
M, don't go to the plant, don't go under the moisture, or under the moisture, okay.
No, don't do it all underneath the hill, so you can plant it, okay?
If you're on this mountain, you're underneath the mountain.
Both of these people are under the great one, the one below, the one below, the one below.
Question 3, question 8 Look, when I hear the sound of a bay, what do I say, or what do I say?
They are pale, men of kabann, men of vivan.
An, don't live, they're not going to sleep.
Mensyon bay ay moun kouche for the sleep of the day.
Pass by and stand.
They're talking about words and phrases.
Everyone has the right to remain silent.
It's all about everyone.
It is ok betiz m chawonyen
I've been thinking about some of the most important things I've ever done.
That's what I do.
It's not the same as living on the other side of the world.
I've never heard of it before.
It's important to note that there is no such thing as a free lunch.
There's no such thing as a free lunch or a free lunch.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to see it.
Use good salt in this way.
Sa o pap di
They are also known as priests.
Or I'll order you again.
This is the order of the day.
I can't tell you what to do.
They are on the profiling of a.
In some cases, for example.
Or just one thing.
They don't do it any more.
Li or not
They don't even know what they're talking about.
I'm not going to be able to do anything about it.
Manmoun do I take you l
They're not going to be able to keep up with us.
We've got a lot going on here.
They didn't take it.
They don't take it or they don't get it.
They're in the middle of nowhere.
I'm going to ask you to do something for me or someone else.
Do you know of anyone who can do this without using a single resin?
So who am I to tell you, who am I to tell you, or who am I to tell you?
Or will you do it?
Or did I do it, or did I do it, or did I do it, or did I do it, or did I do it, or did I do it, or did I do it, or did I do it, or did I do it, or did I do it, or did I do it, or did I do it?
It's not easy to make mechanics.
or by Sispel m t fè menchaste.
Take it easy, or I'll take it easy again.
Well, if someone does an Egyptian p'ap pale, or needs to do a bite or something in your head, it's one of them.
I'm going to tell you a story.
Good, or else you might as well be a menchaste.
Or as a menchaste.
Anyone who can't stand the sight of you, or who can't stand the sight of you, can't stand the sight of you.
I'm going to kill you for your head.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do this or not, but I'm not going to be able to do this.
It's time to go back to the drawing board again.
I'm going to have to keep my head down.
Okay, so I'm going to say it again, for the next generation or the next generation, or the next generation.
It's always on people's minds.
Okay, well, I'll tell you one more time, if you don't mind.
Or two people.
You've got to look at this guy.
It's the same person who's infected.
The monk is the third monk.
Or sell people who look like you.
It looks a lot like it.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it.
In order to keep an eye on Oulèd?
When you're together, when you're apart, when you're alone.
Okay, tell me again, Oulèd?
Oulèd to an koukou.
Okay, and then again, I'm going to do it again.
Sansal ve di Oulèd, where are you?
Kwa, kwa an koukou.
I'm going to have to ask you again.
The two men were released on a bond.
There is no such thing as a human being.
I'm going to tell you this one or the other.
I'm not going to write you a letter.
There's a lot of people out there who say yes.
Gen or gen tan
I can't wait to get back to you.
It's the same person or the same person.
Or a letter from you.
Such as wou koukou
The card is written as if it were a letter.
A good kid is a good boy.
My grandmother's mother.
It is possible or impossible to make them appear.
They appear to be well-versed in alot M ap tann wa rè
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
Or mizadò or gen kote oute ye
You've been out of the country ever since.
Okay, or I'll say one more time.
I've known you since I was a kid.
money or property after the end of the year.
If God is OK.
That's the only way or the only way.
The good news is that I'm not the only one who's going to lose weight.
Take this person for example.
Yes, it's the only thing I can do.
It's nice to be back with you and your family, and it's nice to be back with you and your family.
As a person, yes.
If I see you, I'll follow you.
He's behind you when you walk.
They're after me for a walk.
After that I could walk.
I don't know what to say.
There is a problem.
Keep up the good work.
Sigon machin k ap pati a midi
Driving a motor vehicle is not recommended for children.
I'm going to put my hand on it.
Why don't you tell me?
This is not a repeat of noumen child
If you can't see why you can't see it, you can't see why you can't see it.
I'm going to be a kid and I'm going to be a kid and I'm going to be a kid and I'm going to be a kid and I'm going to be a kid and I'm going to be a kid and I'm going to be a kid and I'm going to be a kid and I'm going to be a kid and I'm going to be a kid and I'm going to be a kid and I'm going to be a kid and I'm going to be a kid and I'm going to be a kid and
Or you can't take it anymore.
Is there any way to save your soul?
Isn't that the kind of kid you love about Dalét, or what?
There are many people who love Dalét.
Or they'll say the same thing to you or they'll say the same thing to you.
Or you know what happens when 19 sections of the app start.
I'll tell you when things start to change.
It's time to get started.
There is no such thing as sectarianism.
I'm going to start with a.
I'm going to try to get to the next few sections.
It's a good thing when someone sees you at the end of the day and pays for your life.
There is a lot of money to be made.
In the wake of the September 9 attacks, there was a significant increase in the number of deaths.
It will be reopened in September.
A party was disbanded in September.
Or you can also use it as part of a party of 17 tons of marijuana.
You can't or won't win.
It's a must to go.
It's okay with other people, but it's not always the case.
a rebooted tab lan
A gen l Pa gen
It's okay to sit on the front of the table.
You'll be in front of me and I'll be in front of you and I'll be in front of you and I'll be in front of you and I'll be in front of you and I'll be in front of you and I'll be in front of you and I'll be in front of you and I'll be in front of you and I'll be in front of you and I'll be in front of you and I'll be in front of you and I'll be in front of you.
You're not on the table.
Okay, so I'm not going to worry about you again.
The men or women in front of you are in front of you.
Don't worry, I'll be back in the next few days.
We, we know, well, we can't afford to admit it, can we?
I'm here to tell you, I'm here to tell you, I'm here to tell you, I'm here to tell you, I'm here to tell you, I'm here to tell you, I'm here to tell you, I'm here to tell you, I'm here to tell you, I'm here to tell you, I'm here to tell you, I'm here to tell you, I'm here to tell you, I'm here to tell you, I'm here to tell you, I'm here to tell
Let's say, for example:
This is the first time that a person has been charged with a crime.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make the cut.
It is a prank.
Okay, well, what's your birthday?
When I was born.
It's like a birthday party.
Where are you now?
I'm not going to get married again.
It's not an end in itself.
If you want to change your mind, change your mind.
Or if you want to change your mind.
I can't give you a new one.
He ordered me to do it or not.
Or you can say it or you can say it or you can say it or you can say it or you can say it or you can say it or you can say it or you can say it or you can say it or you can say it or you can say it or you can say it or you can say it or you can say it or you can say it or you can say it or you can say it or you can say it or you can say it or you can do it.
I don't know.
Di danyan Oki
I used to sing to cut poulouwe a
To know how to hear a bay a bay a li included
I can hear you when I hear you.
I don't know what to say to you.
It's been a long time coming.
Gen moun pa exant
Who's going to get out of here?
The men who need to be with me are the ones who need to be with me.
It's not just the people who need it, it's the people who need it, it's the people who need it, it's the people who need it, it's the people who need it, it's the people who need it, it's the people who need it, it's the people who need it, it's the people who need it, it's the people who need it.
It's with a lot of praise.
They're proud to be with us.
Or they're pretty good at it.
Li and ap are derived from anven
They prale an pa minan.
I'm going to say it again.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it again or not.
I'm not going to pay for it.
It's kind of like being together.
O chout yo on kote
about others coming from a place.
It's not even possible.
It's not even close.
They're right next to me.
It's a short walk from here.
They're proud to go along with it.
Either they're right next to each other, or they're right next to each other.
new clothes together with m
They are co-extensive with m.
Yeah, or I'm going to be with you.
I'm going to stay with you.
Tell me who's doing it.
I know what I'm doing.
This is the first time I've seen a man in my life.
I can do what I can to make it better.
They can't do it all in one shot.
I've been waiting for you.
We're going to ban them.
I'm going to do a men's opening.
It's a good start to the season.
We're going to do something about it.
I'm going to open the door.
It's a good idea if you're going to do it.
For example, dishes or dishes are washed after washing or with water.
After planting or planting in the garden.
or need to say.
The dishes are la lavi.
It's good if they're doing it.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it.
Enki Bon Soob di la.
I will continue to do so.
I'm not going to continue.
You are one of April's friends.
I was born in April.
Yo en ab Ou machin tou
You'll have to do it before you've done it.
It's a good thing you're here.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm going to do the same thing.
I'm going to try to make it work.
I'm going to do the same thing.
Lefini, I'm going to do other things.
What do you want to do again?
I'm not going to be able to get out of this car.
I believe that you can use this tool, it's good, but if you want to use it or not, you can use it again.
I'm going to put you in the back of this car.
Okay, well, then, on another occasion, I'm going to tell you something.
I'm going to buy this car.
Or you can answer the question.
I'm going to buy this car again.
I'm going to make sure it's okay.
When I finally bought this car, I bought it.
The good thing is that I know what to do and I take water.
I'm going to take the water with me and I'm going to re-release it.
I don't know what to say.
The good news is that I'm going to be able to do it.
It's the only thing the machine can do.
I'm going to do the same thing.
I'm not sure what I'm going to say.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do next.
I'm going to give you a chance to try something new.
I'm just going to come in, and I'm going to drive the car.
A good one, all right.
When people tell you to have a dream, you can't sleep.
If we can't go back to the drawing board, we can't go back to the drawing board.
It's not like I'm going to sit here and talk to you.
Or you can tell the person I'm sitting next to to to make the dream come true.
It's time for you to go back to the drawing board.
Or voyn bay or ta ta meet in the middle
It's time for me to go back to sleep.
I'm waiting for you to come back.
Wad kouwa k ap di sa
You're going to have to wait until the end.
A decade has passed since then.
If you want to know more about the equation, you can use it to generate the equation.
It's the only thing I've ever seen.
It's all right or wrong.
In the midst of you.
Or by order of jwon wou ta card no
I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
Anpou w card is a card.
Anmi yon ryoy w card ant la tou
I'm going to tell you a little bit about it.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
No, I'm not a writer.
I don't want to be confused with you.
You've got to get up there.
They stood there.
I've been waiting for you to stop.
They are mounted on the tab of the table.
Or do anything else.
They're standing on the table.
They're standing on the edge of their seats.
They're standing in front of you.
Or you can come back again.
Stand up and be counted.
I'm standing there in front of him.
Okay or not, you can stand or sit and talk.
There's nothing you can do about it.
One of them stood for the tab.
I'm standing or standing.
They're standing outside the table.
Okay, or can you give them a pocket for the bed?
Well, if it's not for you, then it's for you.
And if so, how can I be the person who is in charge of the bed?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
Okay, so what?
That's why I'm not talking to my dad.
You can't have a baby.
Children and young people are not alone.
I can't put my finger on it.
I'm going to tell you a story.
To be a child at work.
It's a very important job.
Help the children and make it easy to do the job.
I don't know who he is.
Si bon pose ke gen yon person k ap now
I'm going to tell you about it.
Start now, even now.
The same applies to the video.
One person knows where the gene is.
One more generation.
What they say is the same.
They're all over the place.
On the other hand, the lap falls.
I've got a lot of work to do, and I've got a lot of things to do.
I've been waiting for April to fall.
When they fall, they will fall to the ground.
Or you can't order it again.
I'm very happy with it.
I'm going to pay you a ton.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to do it.
I'm going to pay you a ton.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to keep up with that.
I didn't eat them.
I've been waiting for something new.
From now on, I'm going to pay your bills.
I can't tell you what to do.
I can't wait to see it.
On what is yes, on longen twapye, on man mando ki longen bay sa, or on divi genen twapye, win twapye, denen longen.
Or see something else.
Empi on the people who make it happen.
I don't want to go to the bathroom.
As if I wanted to do something worthwhile.
I don't want to say anything about it.
Let's see what happens.
What's going on?
You don't know what's going on, you don't know what's going on, you don't know what's going on, you don't know what's going on, you don't know what's going on, you don't know what's going on, you don't know what's going on, you don't know what's going on, you don't know what's going on, you don't know what's going on, you don't know what's going on.
Start with something that's going to happen.
I'm not sure if it's my fault.
If someone walks in this way, or knows where to go,
I'm going to tell you.
Or I'm going to tell you.
They don't have to go through a lot of things or even go through a lot of things.
If the person wants to go or call me, I'm going to pass him by like this before he passes me by.
and passing behind them.
One of them is the world.
I'm going to the city.
This is because they want to know.
We're going to see them and we're going to see them.
There is a section on the city.
I don't know what to do with myself.
It's just a matter of time before it's done.
They know what they're looking for.
They know what they're doing.
They're a kite.
Or they're going to be able to get rid of Andy.
Andòyò or gen likite Andòyò or gen likite Andòyò
I'm living in my own house.
I'm trying to make a living out of it.
I live in the area.
If I don't live there, I won't be able to work there.
It's going to make me fall.
I'm not going to fall.
They're falling down.
It's not easy.
I'm just trying to find the right people.
It's more than anyone else's.
and ap pale de li
You are a good person.
men or the need for good men.
There are also other outlets for good people.
You are a good man.
I have a kiss in my mouth.
Who is going to ban people?
If you're a good man, what's the big deal?
Intel and intel, is intel a good person?
Is he a good person, or is he a good person?
Package for your husband and wife.
Men are good people.
It can also be used to show people's dreams.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
I'm going to do something about a sister like Mary.
I don't know what to do with a tank.
We've got a lot of people who want to be with us.
Some of them are still alive.
It's the same with people like you.
There's a lot more to it than that.
Who's going to say it?
It's almost as good as it gets.
Some of them are still alive.
I'm going to go to church.
Or on the road.
I'm going to try something new.
On the person who is going to be there or will be there, p ap di l, m will, m will be there.
Se pa ak yon m prale, se pic pou macha aken or m pral.
You have to take good care of yourself if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you walk or if you
I'm going to have a new one or a new one.
Or will they really do it, or will they really do it?
If you're going to walk or prale w ap vann
I'm going to go or I'm going to go.
Or they'll make a move.
Will do or well will do or well will do.
I'm going to walk.
I'm going to make a move or I'm going to make a move or I'm going to make a move or I'm going to make a move or I'm going to make a move or I'm going to make a move or I'm going to make a move or I'm going to make a move or I'm going to make a move or I'm going to make a move or I'm going to make a move or I'm going to make a move or I'm going to make a move or I'm going to make a move or
I'm going to walk.
Someone who can make them more than that is the father of the family.
I'm going to have lunch or something.
I'm not going to take it anymore.
Take it or leave it.
Take it or leave it.
Now that we're on the same page as you, we're on the same page as you.
The men are waiting for the man to come.
In the meantime, we're going to have to put some pressure on people to come up with a plan.
and hold them together.
I'm trying to hold on to them.
It's the first time I've seen it.
If you need to do this, you can do it again.
Now or then, they need to keep their favorites behind them.
It's not what you want.
They keep the men doing what they're doing.
They hold on to me.
I told them to keep me behind them.
I've got a package for the bay.
There are good people who need help.
The hardest things to do or not to do are to take them seriously.
The fish is on the edge of a cliff.
I'm going to tell you.
What are you going to do about it?
First of all, there's a lot going on here, and then there's a lot going on here.
As if we were in the middle of li
I'm not going to tell you.
It's not like I'm going to be able to keep up with you.
I'm going to tell you about it.
Lok order yo an kadis again
Li yon tijan an diffisil
I'm looking forward to seeing you guys.
I don't want men to do this to me.
11 friends of the company renew w o composòn
It's the only thing I can do to make it work as long as I'm on the ballot.
Do you want to take credit for your money?
No, no, no, not at all.
Aloll la rekesyon anifisil m parak riyan m taka pou ou zou l al a
by ekganp or gwen one se w ki nan kay
You've got a lot of people who feel sorry for you.
It's such a big deal.
men or needs.
It's a good one or so.
I'm going to get out of here.
I'm not sure if it's a good idea or not.
I've been thinking about this for a long time.
I've been waiting for a cup of coffee or a cup of coffee.
Vankasye or te anen rye ti di
It's a lot of fun and it's a lot of fun and it's a lot of fun and it's a lot of fun and it's a lot of fun and it's a lot of fun and it's a lot of fun and it's a lot of fun and it's a lot of fun and it's a lot of fun and it's a lot of fun and it's a lot of fun and it's a lot of fun and it's a lot of fun and it's a lot of fun and it's a lot of
Or at least I'm ready.
The good news is that we're going to get out of here.
Di parapòt tisèm nanm bak a depart
Who chooses to be a member of the tab?
I'd like to make a choice.
I'm going to tell you something.
I know that when the tide begins to fall, the work of the tide begins to fall.
Tell me that b is coming.
since the arrival of the Anme.
On the first day of the month, pi began to fall.
Ap wak di la avre has fallen.
It's the first day of July.
If someone has been doing this ever since then.
They asked for something.
Are they too far away to ask?
Goun bay ki mare la o rail manke
It's just one of those things.
You don't want to pass the lap down.
Are you going to be a priest?
bout près Tanbe
Take, for example, the men's marathon.
They are at the mercy of the people who are at the mercy of the people who are at the mercy of the people who are at the mercy of the people who are at the mercy of the people who are at the mercy of the people who are at the mercy of the people who are at the mercy of the people who are at the mercy of the people who are at the mercy of the people who are at the mercy of the people who are at the mercy of the people who are at the mercy of the people who are at the mercy of the people.
It's time to move on to the next step.
or gen li mare
I'm going to make an appeal.
I don't know if I'll ever hear someone say too much.
Or we can say that you're too much of a fish.
I'm going to do something about Kay.
What can you do about it if you don't talk about money as much as you do about it?
I've got a lot of money for popping up and building a big house.
If you can't do that, you're going to have to make a big change.
It's not a big deal, but it's not a big deal.
I'm not going to say anything.
Or the vain toothpicking men for kiswa w the vain toothpicking a
I'm going to take a bath.
or bagen kob
Don't worry about it or don't worry about it.
I'm not sure about that.
It's not a long cell.
I'm sure she'll be able to help me.
The people will order the gen again
I'm looking for someone to help me.
When I was a kid, I wanted to be a teacher.
Some of you have been told that you're not the only one.
I can't wait to see it.
This is also the year of the year.
M tap m baptized rit according to
There are 3 derivatives.
Men gran moutè with you
Two or three people are coming.
Where are all the people coming from?
Grandma's behind you when everyone comes?
Do you want to follow your people, and do you want to follow everyone who comes?
This is the grandmother's cell.
All who come to septek granmou, pa kouviye?
For all people to come with a single granny, for all people to come with a single granny, for all people to come with a single granny, for all people to come with a single granny, for all people to come with a single granny, for all people to come with a single granny, for all people to come with a single granny, for all people to come with a single granny, for all people to come with a single granny, for all people to come with a single granny, for all people to come with a single granny, or for all people to
or vini septek granmou, pou sel granmou, or wa ka di zado.
or vini septek granmou, or wa ka di zado.
or vini septek granmou
or vinegar Soap
There is only one adult.
It's all right, honey.
It's not like I'm a big man.
The children are going to make a mess of it.
It's time for us to grow up.
Children are not allowed to do it.
Don't make children mess up.
not to cause disorder.
It's the newest addition to the adult collection.
It's important to note that there is a limit to the number of cells that can be removed.
I don't think I can do that.
They can be good.
They can be either good or bad.
swivan swivan great salt
Or to plant a large amount of salt.
Or a person.
They start off dancing.
They start dancing at the beginning of the dance.
There is also a lake in the lake.
See also lakou an men
There's nothing wrong with that.
months of the year.
There is no such thing as a man.
I'm going to take care of it.
They have begun to lay their eggs on the ground.
There are many things to do here.
We are not going to take a new one.
It's not like I'm doing anything wrong.
It's the last thing on my mind.
It's been a while since we've seen Kay La.
What do you want me to do?
It's been a while since I've been able to get a ride.
It's been a few months now.
It's been a long time coming.
I don't think I'm going to be able to do this toukay.
I don't have all the debt or anything.
How do I get there at noon?
Or maybe it's all over the place.
I'm so glad that I've been able to give you so many things.
I don't know what I'm going to say.
As if I'm going to tell you.
I have a job to do.
or the type of work to be done.
Or I'll do better than that.
This is what we have done in the past.
Yes, I'm going to try to make an example of it in the end.
I'm going to do other things.
It's the end of the world for me.
It's a different story.
It is derived from chen an.
derived either from chen or from lap derived from a
For example, if you have a network connection.
The money is on your tab.
It is derived from Chen an Wa di eee those who have won
We rented the house.
I'm always with you.
They're not going to be able to do it.
They don't want to hurt me.
The soul of a man is like a snake.
I made them.
You can do good for them.
I say goodbye to my own clean soul.
Or I'll make it up to them.
Avre te rejès no
We're not going to be able to do it on our own.
They don't always have a clean slate.
Their own souls are clean.
or ren dwak
They're also doing the same thing.
I don't know what to do.
You don't want to be on your own.
I will give them the benefit of the doubt, and I will give them the benefit of the doubt.
Good on you guys who are the most beautiful people in the world.
I'm not going to say a word.
I don't know who you are, but I know who you are.
There's no such thing as a human being.
It's about a man who's a man.
w or ap di
Either way, I'm going to have to go back to the drawing board.
It's a bit of a mystery to me.
I'm going to be a bit of a squirrel.
She's a little girl and she's a little girl.
It's a bit of a shock to me.
Where do you go from here, how do you go from here?
I'm not a very nice kid.
I'm sure you'll find it very nice.
wè tanp ap di won the order of jen
I'm not sure if it's true.
There is no problem.
For example, in some cases.
It's not like I'm going to be able to eat it.
There's no way I'm going to stop.
If you're the only one, or if you're the only one standing, you're the only one.
It's going to be a struggle.
I can't stand it any more.
On the man who is the father of popos
on who works.
I can't wait to see Lijans.
I don't have a working room.
I don't know how many people are going to get the job done.
Take a guy to work like this.
Take the guy to work.
If you don't know what you're talking about
On some occasions, it's been a while since I've seen one.
It's a great way to get a job.
It's like taking a bath.
Or, at least, a bunch of them.
Men or dou route lap a bon
Or let the person know even if the road is good enough.
I'm sure you'll find a way.
W ap di l
Now repeat the same thing again and again.
It's a good way to go.
E or ta all l pa bon m ap to continue.
It's not like Mokade or anything else is still ahead of us.
It's good that I'm going to keep going.
Well, yeah, what a launch.
I'm ready for my apple and I'm ready for the new Italian soup.
It's good for me to keep going.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
I'm going to keep going.
There's no sound at all.
I'm not going to say that I'm not going to be able to do a good job.
I'm going to do what I'm going to do to keep going.
Well, Antouka, it's a good road, not a good one, to continue.
OUka di Antouka adou?
We're not going to wait.
Whichever way you look at it, there's no doubt about it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not, but I'm going to keep going.
Such as renn wa di kelki
Whenever and wherever you want to be.
Soun nonm kouche so non route ki an kouche la l kouche
In the middle of the road.
They're in the middle of it because they don't know the road.
Start at the bottom so you're not in the middle of the road.
on the side of the road.
I can't wait to get back on the road.
By the way, I'm sure you've heard of them.
Bennen the road to the other side.
I'm going to be on my way.
Or rather, I'm going to do it this way.
They will walk in the same way as they walk in your plave soap.
It's all in your head.
You're going to die.
Now the train is ready to go.
I'm going to tell you about the wine.
I've been waiting for you guys to come up with something.
or entering tan
We're going to have to move on.
It's a new way of looking at things.
You can't or won't.
It's the same person you're looking for.
I'm going to walk, even if someone is standing there.
The man stood there.
And I'm going to stand up and be counted.
I've been waiting for you again, and I've been waiting for you.
If you are seven men or not together
angel or non-stop
I don't know what to say.
I'm going to touch it.
I'm standing in the way.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I don't know what I'm going to say again.
Yo stood up in the safes.
They're at noon.
I'm going to miss you for lunch, and I'm going to miss you.
They're ready for lunch.
Li yon dek ap is currently in the process of being retired.
They're ready for noon.
I can't wait to see you again.
They're having lunch at noon.
It's about two o'clock in the afternoon.
I can't say I'm not in love with her.
I've got a new one coming up.
Good luck with your life.
I know you're going to live up to the hype.
In the morning there is no sunshine.
I've come to your father's house.
Do you know how to live your life?
It's a man's life.
As if someone were coming.
But I understand that they give great people a few things.
There are a few great things to be confused about.
A child's generosity is not what it is.
I'm going to tell you how to interact with things in a new way.
They don't know what they're doing.
They don't want their children to do anything new.
The children are not listening to you.
You know what I'm talking about.
Children's toys are not for the faint of heart.
There is no such thing as a human being.
If you ask me, I'll tell you what I'm feeling.
Or take a bag like a child's.
For the children, it means nothing.
Or tap repeatedly or tap phone bon
Bon fwa zoudi yeah children
Yeah, the kids are nothing.
Or tap on the bay in front of the children's room and they'll be there for nothing.
Or hear them tap repeatedly as they say Men or meet won't do anything in front of me just to make it better.
I don't know who he is.
An, y ap ay are the ones who are the ones.
Don't think I'm the same person as you.
Even the ones who give you a man.
Enm exyon yo pran tekadi sa anpo.
Well, that's what I'm talking about.
Or you can't give up on someone you don't know.
I wonder if I am now or not.
w ap di no
They're badly damaged.
They're in a lot of trouble.
The men were showing signs of illness.
The gravity of the earth's gravitational pull is very high.
The order of the state man will sometimes be good enough to make or break again
A gen order li ankon men pou
Or believe them to be true.
The State Department ordered them to meet with each other.
Bon ou te kadis an answit or pa gen order jan again
There is a lot to be done about it.
Or maybe it's better if you ask me if I'm here now or if I'm here.
We're the only ones who know how to do this.
I'm not even good at it.
This is so new to pran dejan.
Would you say they're sick?
If, for example, you have something to say.
We're going to do something about it.
Or have done so before.
Before we know it, we're going to do it.
Or maybe it's Akadi again.
as before before
There is no such thing as an answering machine.
Flant is dead.
The fullness of the lapri
I'm not sure if I'm going to fall.
When you plant a plant, you die.
It's the best thing to do before falling.
The flant yo pa fell.
Many of them died when the tank collapsed.
Many died when the tank collapsed.
I'm going to have to deal with this man.
Pa, there's a whole lot of ap li.
Why do I have to go to another place?
The more it falls in this area, the more I walk or walk, the more it begins to fall.
If you want to start a new relationship, start a new one.
It's been a while since I've fallen.
I'm sure you'll be able to see more than a few of them falling down.
We've lost a lot of weight.
What can you do again?
But now you've got to do the work and do the things you want to do.
I'm going to do what I want to do.
It's okay if you're going to do your job.
I'm going to do my job.
I'm not going back to work anymore.
Good on someone or a bucket of tea.
They won a month's worth of tea.
win or lose.
They're going to give you a month's worth of advice.
The evakonn are very good.
They're coming or going.
I'm not going to say what I'm going to do about it.
I'm going to do the best I can for you.
I'm sorry if I have a few questions or a bunch of questions.
Don't go back to the drawing board.
For example, on a person's life, for example, or on a person's life.
The two men were so close together.
I'm wondering if there's such a thing.
He or she is the person or persons responsible for the delivery of the goods.
Li o m in gen 2 of our mother's right to open it.
In Gen 2 we have a mommy.
They need someone like you as much as they need someone like you.
It's a great way to make wine.
It's easy for you to repeat a sentence so that you can put it back into words when you ask questions.
I'll have another wine in the next few weeks.
I've been drinking wine for a few weeks now.
They came to us.
I don't want to see you guys.
Idou so non
I don't know why I'm here.
There's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
I'm going to see a big car.
Do you know why I'm here?
I'm in the middle of it.
I don't know anything about it.
I'm going to see you later.
You are depreferans of one great you.
It is prefixed as m di ou.
The men in your genome may or may not have died.
A group of men t de preferans or pa pa ka di di or lè de preferans or d'un ordre de quelque chose
Mo favorans or big cutè, or two?
favorites or big cousins.
Or you may prefer to use it too.
or can be de preferans
or by di preferans
It's not like I'm giving you an order.
Or you can't tell me what's going on.
I'm sorry to disappoint you right now.
For those of you who know me, there's no such thing as a woman as a beautiful thing to do in a gravy like this.
What's going on with the gravon?
Women are the most beautiful women in the world.
on the other side of the world.
I'm going to take it from here.
Take a look at them.
They were taken from the other three.
There are three of them.
Li la tri On the person who is lying on the couche
Wherever the fish are, they lie down.
I'm going to go with a bagalrit
Things are very different.
Li kouche tou is also used.
Or your father or your father.
Either way, we're still here.
There is no such thing as too much.
Li kouche tou pa tou te sa li kouche to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to
How many times can I put them on the couch?
Do you want me to touch you?
Don't give up on me.
Li kouche pa tou
I can't wait to see the rest of you again.
I'm not going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie, I'm going to lie
I can't wait to get my hands on it.
Oken men yo di pa tou avre
I'm not going to be able to make it to the next level.
Where I'm going to spend my money.
They're coming to the front of the house.
It's the first time I've seen it.
The front is on the left.
Di depanse adwat sa left
I don't know if it's true or not.
I don't know or care.
I can't wait to get started on this one.
Or I could say a word to put it in my pocket.
It's not a new word, or a new word, or a new word, or a new word, or a new word, or a new word, or a new word, or a new word, or a new word, or a new word, or a new word, or a new word, or a new word, or a new word, or a new word, or a new word, or a new word, or a new word, or a new word, or a new word, or a new word.
Or to say a word or two.
It's not your fault.
It's not like you're going to die.
I don't know creole.
Put it on or on a mat and I'll tell you what.
These are the words.
Or did he say that Ayisyen is me.
Or if you don't know how to write in Creole, you don't know how to write in Creole.
What is the meaning of wakon di sa
So you don't have to be a creepy creep.
It's been a long time since I've written in Creole.
It's either good or bad.
on bon fwa zanm
A good man will make his way to work.
You can eat your dishes.
There's always something going on here.
Or maybe they're still up there.
There's always going to be progress.
They're still there.
They're always on the lookout.
I'm alone if I can love me and if I can love you, you can love me.
They can love me and love me.
I love you and you love me and you love me.
The first man is a man.
I'm going to take this guy with me.
This is Alan Fonk.
It's the father's business.
Alan Negr al.
Al anegal atren in Sèbè a yon zanm Wa Kondi in fwen guy Alèz
It's about who I am right now.
I have the same vegetable that will not be eaten and the same thing will not be eaten and the same thing will not be eaten and the same thing will not be eaten and the same thing will not be eaten and the same thing will not be eaten and the same thing will not be eaten and the same thing will not be eaten and the same thing will not be eaten and the same thing will not be eaten and the same thing will not be eaten and the same thing will not be eaten.
Aprè nou yo bay tout
Yo bay everything now yo
Each of the men in the red carpet will serve you well.
I'm going to put you on.
The answer is, put it all together, and I'm going to use it.
I'm going to use it for a living.
Let's work together as a team.
I'm not sure about that.
It's not like I don't know what I'm talking about.
An example is someone who knows me well.
L ap kipe finmen
The men are still in the same position as the Finns.
It's a good thing we've seen the movie so far.
Today is a day to remember.
This is the basis of the movie.
I'm not going to watch the movie.
I'm going to do it again.
on the people to win
They want to get to know you almost the same way as I do.
Li pa fin even chan an
They are almost the same size.
They're ready to go.
I'm ready to go with them.
They can be made ready for the same ball.
They are ready for me to go to school.
Even if it is ready for the same ball.
They won't be able to do it.
The sound of your ears is like that of an ape.
It's a little too close for comfort.
A man on the other side of the fence has arrived.
So much for people.
That's the way it is.
Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
If you want to get up in the morning, get up in the morning.
When I woke up, I felt like I was going to die.
It's a week and a half away.
I'm not sure what's going on.
Either way, I'm not ordering anything again.
They're still there.
When you get to the mountains of the cabin.
It is located on the side of the mountain in front of the cabin.
I'm on the side of the mountain.
They're still at the top of the mountain.
They will not reach the mountain of the cabin.
On the other hand, I'm not sure what's going on here.
They don't want to be left behind.
I'm not sure I'm going to be able to do that again.
I'm going to give it to them and I'm going to give it to them.
These are the things I'm going to keep in mind.
We don't know if you're going to be able to make it to Grandma's.
I can't stand the grass.
Why can't you just leave?
There is something about behaving with children that is not respectful of the mother and that is not acceptable to the child.
It's not just me.
There are a number of ways to do this.
I've only seen them once.
They are only known to Men.
Only if it is open to the public.
I'm not sure what I'm talking about.
I'm so excited to be able to do all this for my grandmother and grandmother.
They don't even respect what you say.
He is no longer alive.
As a man, you have the right to be respected and respected.
How do I look at it?
I've been looking for a man.
If you're a mother, you're a mother.
If you let go of the gas.
If you let me know, I'll let you know.
That's why I'm here.
It's not that new.
If I raise a man and a mother, I will only respect them.
Men's right shoe is also available.
Both male and female.
There is no respect for anyone.
It's not just me, it's me, it's you.
I don't have any respect for you.
I have no respect for him.
If you don't know who the Egyptians are, will you accept them?
I don't know if I can eat or drink.
I'm not going to be able to do this again.
If I can accept it, I can accept it.
You can't say no to me.
You can use it or accept it on a good order, or you can order it.
I'm going to finish treating myself.
I will treat you quickly or take you back to me.
I can't help but wonder.
Bon o gen yon order room or can di sa
I've got my head up my ass.
I'll take you to pray for me afterwards.
I'm going to have to do it again or I'm going to have to go back to the drawing board.
There's a lot more to it than that.
I'm going to tell you the truth, and I'm going to tell you the truth.
I'll take care of myself if I'm going to make a decision.
I've been waiting for you.
I can't wait to get out of here.
After that, if I don't, I'm going to pray to myself, I'm going to pray to you.
Okay, well, here we go again, I've known this guy since I've been here twice, haven't you?
It's better when I'm in the mood for wine.
It's not that easy.
It's been a long time since I've been here.
Is it now or is it coming?
Do you want to come here now or when?
I'm going to tell you about my grandmother and my grandmother and I'm going to tell you about my grandmother and I'm going to tell you about my grandmother and I'm going to tell you about my grandmother and I'm going to tell you about my grandmother and I'm going to tell you about my grandmother and I'm going to tell you about my grandmother and I'm going to tell you about my grandmother and I'm going to tell you about my grandmother and I'm going
What is the meaning of the word papò la?
I'm sure you'll be able to find the answer to that question.
I'm going to tell my dad about it.
My dad is my cousin.
Don't talk to your father or need to talk to him.
No one has a pop-up card or a pop-up card or a pop-up card.
Ornament of the people.
I can't wait to get back to work and get back to work.
So, what do you want me to do about it?
It's too late for that.
I don't know why I'm not here.
Jets from the sky.
From the sky to the sky.
The men or the men of Gadon and the men of Fele
It's a good idea to put something on the table.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
Ayzanm boukwon packed up to do it.
It's the first time I've seen it.
You're the one who's going to take your word for it.
Did they take everything from you?
If you are a sick man, you are sick.
A doctor or a doctor may not come to you to do something specific for your illness.
The directory should be repeated at the same time as the doctor or the doctor.
I've done a lot of things to make you sick.
There are four doctors or doctors.
I've come to the point where I'm sick of it.
I'm not sure if I'm sick or not.
It's not like I'm sick of it.
I'm really sick of it.
For the first time in my life, I'm sick of the fact that I'm sick of the fact that I'm sick of the fact that I'm sick of the fact that I'm sick of the fact that I'm sick of the fact that I'm sick of the fact that I'm sick of the fact that I'm sick of the fact that I'm sick of the fact that I'm sick of the fact that I'm sick of the fact that I'm sick of the fact that I'm sick of the fact that I'm sick of the
Bon on mon konn fè sa ok
They came to me even to ask me something.
I don't know if the price is right.
I don't know.
I don't know anything about you.
Do you know anything about it?
It's not an expansion.
on moun pou rale
I don't even know if I can get my hands on it.
Tell it to the men.
I'm sure you'll be able to find your way around.
Li yon de ka ka diz ankon
I betou a single one of yoon dou yo
A good example is a good example.
They're so good at it.
If you're going to be like us.
Where are you now?
It's not like it's blood.
I'm not going to tell you anything new.
We've got a lot of new things coming up.
There is nothing new I don't know how to do.
I don't know what it is.
Take it or leave it, take it or leave it.
This is a panel discussion.
I know what you're talking about.
Or you can come from a panel country.
They fell in the same place.
Or where are you going?
Well, what if you can't measure something by someone, or by measuring it too much, or by measuring it too much?
Ba woul plen non
Li plen men as si or pa overase l
It's going to be a big hit.
I don't know if I'm overweight or obese.
I'm trying to see if I can find it.
Depa egizan for a good meal or chadèl bon
I can't wait to get back to you.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
The man who drank the wine won't win.
After all, it's been a while since I've done anything.
They have taken a lot of people's attention.
They're going to do a lot of things that they're going to take away from them.
They're going to have to make sure they're doing the right thing.
Oukadi once again did the same thing.
I'm just trying to get a feel for it.
They do what they want to do.
They're just doing the right thing.
They're just doing the ball.
If you're in a situation where you're in a situation where you're in a situation where you're in a situation where you're in a situation where you're in a situation where you're in a situation where you're in a situation where you're in a situation where you're in a situation where you're in a situation where you're in a situation where you're in a situation where you're in a situation where you're in a situation where you're in a situation where you're in a situation where you're in a situation
I'm going to see him, I'm going to see him, I'm going to see him, I'm going to see him, I'm going to see him, I'm going to see him, I'm going to see him, I'm going to see him, I'm going to see him, I'm going to see him, I'm going to see him, I'm going to see him, I'm going to see him, I'm going to see him, I'm going to see him, I'm going to see
Wake up, Jesus, why don't you celebrate it again, make it look like a dream.
Wakadi, jis, kaske.
You'll see him, the helmet, the little boy and the girl.
It has been a long time since the colony was established.
If you want to meet the men and women of the invitation, please contact them.
Or if someone doesn't know how to make wine for you, you can't make wine for yourself.
The men are doing so well that they don't have to come.
I want to be able to come to you.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
I've been waiting for you to come back.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
It's not like I'm going to be able to get my hands on you.
I really don't know what I'm talking about.
If you're worried about someone, you're not going to be able to do it, and if you're cold or cold, you're not going to be able to do it.
It's freezing cold.
You can't or won't.
by order of the genus or of the genus Lanpo.
m fret distan
It's a few minutes away.
Or you can tell me what to do about it right now.
I'll give you a first look.
I'll talk to you for a second.
He is the third son of Li Li Li.
It's about a quarter of the way through.
Now I'm happy and happy and I'm ready.
Now to make sure you know that there is a lot more to it than that.
It's now or never.
Okay, so who's going to change your mind again?
Okay, don't know what I'm going to change.
So what's the deal with you?
If someone does something wrong, even to wear it, or to wear it, or to wear it.
Gad is the second in line.
On the one who conpon nou kay la ou di ak kay la pa prenon lijis
Lijis pi dey
I'm going to open the door for you.
Lijis are ahead of the curve.
forward and open.
Lijis pi ba
Lijis in the area of pi ba
on moun metou on thing la
I can't put a man ahead of me.
Tell me about the area.
What's going on in the future?
b ap ble mal.
I've always known someone who's been there for me, who's been there for me, who's been there for me, who's been there for me, who's been there for me, who's been there for me, who's been there for me, who's been there for me, who's been there for me, who's been there for me, who's been there for me, who's been there for me, who's been there for me, who's been there for me, who's been there for me.
What are you talking about?
It's not for those who like to be bullied by bad men.
If you bring something to someone or something, how can you do it?
I'm going to be okay with it.
Or the net.
I'm not sure where I'm going with it.
For example, you're going to have to wait until you're gone.
I'm not sure where I'm going with it.
It's not there.
Or do you know what you're doing?
I'm old and I'm old.
It's not about the old and the new.
Or they will be called Bon.
on people, for example.
I'm going to take a bakery.
I don't know if I'm going to take bakay.
I'm going to take them.
What do they take?
They're taking it easy.
Take a point or take a good one.
They make a point.
You can't do that anymore.
It's just that I'm not good enough.
Or a series of people who don't learn when to sit down.
I'm not sure if you're going to be able to do that.
Who are you talking about?
Whether you are in need of someone, even of someone, or of everyone, you are in need of someone.
If you want to wash it well or if you don't want to wash it well.
They are the ones who have to be silenced.
They're good to go now.
They're not happy about it.
I know they love it.
Rad la pa
I feel like I'm going to sit down completely.
I don't know if they'll work for me or if they'll work for me.
or to the conveyance of the bay or condidé
I've been working as a clerk for a few years now.
The times we repeat the same thing are either good or bad.
It's not perfect.
It's hard to work with men who are your critics.
We're going to do a lot of work for you.
You're the only one who can judge everything.
I'm going to do a lot of work here.
Men or women?
men or back a di
Back to work as a m
I don't think I've ever watched a television show before.
I've just watched a television show.
I can't watch TV with men.
It's not your criterion or the same thing.
A person can say something or be a criterion, but they can't.
That's what I'm talking about.
If you don't or don't know who you are.
I don't want to watch a TV.
I'm not going to be able to get a new job.
We're going to have to work hard to find a new job.
Or you can say
The men have been deprived of their rights.
I don't know if it's easy for you to find it or not.
It is open to the public.
When I met him, I went back to La.
Ap releè palè nou an
Bon si for example yo bò on bay answit se bannann nou viyan ap ba yo bò mwen twa
You're going to hear it.
I'm not sure what to do with your frenn.
The lavan m jen jen
On se pa yo bon jen aprè w non
We're not going to be able to keep up with what's going on until we're done with it.
I'm so envious of someone I'm not allowed to talk to or talk to.
I've learned that there is no such thing.
After you say or get more than m
There's no more to it than that.
If you take me more, I'll take you more.
If there is more to it than me.
I'm going to tell you something about someone who's not there.
Or you can't do that anymore.
A few days later, one of my friends and I decided to go to the bathroom and go to the bathroom.
A man or two knows the thing.
It's the same person or thing.
I don't know anything about what's going on.
What can I say?
I'm going to tell you what to do.
You're not going to be able to do it before you've done it.
There's nothing you can do about it.
I can tell you who I don't know.
Hotel is a thing of the past.
I don't know.
There is no money left.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do next.
I don't know about you.
I don't know what I'm going to say.
You're going to take it or leave it or you're going to die or you're going to die or you're going to die or you're going to die or you're going to die or you're going to die or you're going to die or you're going to die or you're going to die or you're going to die or you're going to die or you're going to die or you're going to die or you're going to die or you're going to die or you're going to die.
I don't know.
I don't know what I'm going through.
I don't know what to do with myself.
Either that or it's not an announcement.
I don't know if I'm going to be good at it.
I don't know how to use it either.
Wow, I don't know how to do that.
Okay, good, yeah.
I'm going to give you a little bit of information about what's going on here.
Men or women don't know if they know what they're talking about.
If you don't know anything about it.
Or from a guy like that.
The guy is a genius.
I'm not sure what to do about it.
This guy is a genius.
It's the same as being in jail.
It's all about the people and the people.
It's not the same person.
I'm not sure what's going on here.
It's time for you to do it or tell me to do it.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it or not.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do this, but I'm not going to be able to do this.
Or I'll tell you something like that.
Now, if you're going to be a genius, you're going to be a genius.
I don't know if they'll come back again.
or bakonn men
I've always wanted to do this kind of thing.
They're not coming out of it.
I'm not sure if it's true.
There is no way out.
Do you think that all of this is possible in the future?
There's no way I'm going to win.
Or I won't win.
Don't give up or come back to me and tell me what's going on.
If you have a place or a place, you know what I mean.
or combine it all with each other.
To say or not to say
I'll give you everything you need if you can't do anything about it.
In question 2059 we hear very well.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
It's the end of my life.
They're not going to be able to keep up with you.
Aren't you going to find out?
I don't want to be a pet or even with my sister.
It's great to be here.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it.
Now we have to get out of here.
They are now happy.
I'm a man of many talents, but I'm not a man of many talents.
Ap is derived from pita OK m
It's good to know how to be a person.
There are other ways to understand other people, or there are other ways to understand other people.
Even if they win, they don't win.
Or they can't understand what's going on.
If it's not good or on screen, I'm going to devout myself to it.
You're right here.
I'm going to go with my grandmother.
I was raised by my grandmother.
I'm going to do 2
My grandmother's mother died.
My grandmother's grandmother.
What's up with Grandma Plus?
Hello, my grandmother, my grandmother, my grandmother, my grandmother, who is my grandmother plus?
W pass more than
Li gen plus is not bwenn because w a
The good news is that you're not alone.
Without the renfonnen, you can't make it to the ball.
People and the Party win.
Or ask people questions or questions.
Why can't you just go to the bathroom?
Or do it well.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
There's something I can tell you about it.
Or on the bed.
They know or they don't know what they're doing.
Or they're just like that.
Or almost everything.
Okay, well, either gen something or ap pre bay iknanm, epi gen someone who mande or, or benjanen, or benjanen.
Mouzen watches are available in a wide range of sizes.
It's just that there's a lot more to it than meets the eye.
It's either good or bad, and you can't order it again.
They're just trying to keep up with it.
It's okay to buy.
They're ready to go.
There's no one to blame.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it.
There may be a lot of them.
If I lose like this, I'll do it again.
I've made a lot of friends so that when someone walks in a crowd of people, they can vote for you.
A bon pa gen l'autre yo would have said it again ey
On those who run away from the life of the child, they run away to the sea.
I'm dying of thirst and I'm dying of thirst.
As if I were to die alone, I would die.
There's only one thing I'm going to die for.
It's not an expanse.
or santi fredi
It's either that or it's that.
I'm just going to die in the cold.
I don't know anything about cleanliness in my room.
Enmen se jouure enmen se jouure
As if there were only one person to do it or to pop it up for the day.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it today.
It's the first day of the year.
As if there is only one bagal al know your time
They're not going to be around much longer.
I'm not going to be the only one to clean up my own house.
They're not clean, they're just clean.
Or do something or tell someone to buy a package of something for you.
I've got a new one for you.
They don't want to forget whether they have it or they don't need it.
They buy everything from men to men.
Okay, well, either way, you'll know it by now.
On the one hand, there is a lot of wine in the bottle.
Li vin lanmi wo
They're winning here.
Li vin isit chak l
The wine is made from cheven.
I'm not going to let you down.
It's the only thing I can do.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it.
Or did you ever get pregnant again?
I don't want to lose you.
I don't know what to do with myself.
I don't know anything about it.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it.
It is possible to generate photography.
on who's doing it.
They're buying something.
They buy wine for men.
It's not like I don't know what I'm going to eat.
I'm in the middle of something.
Yes, I'm not going to be an intern to tell you something or want to tell you something or want to tell you something or want to tell you something or want to tell you something.
I've never heard of such a thing.
I don't know if it's me, or if I want to or not.
Or I'll say it again.
I can't wait to get back to you.
I want to be with you.
People often want to repeat the same sentence with the same thing.
Tantan or willsa, tantan or willsa.
There are so many others that they will need them or they will need them.
Or better yet, I'm going to be there.
They're going to be good or bad.
I'm very proud of you.
It's like a spey.
One of them is a place or a man is a scandal.
Empi or of such a
I've got a bunch of scandals going on.
Lozinate the yo tou
Or I'll tell you how to do it.
Or I want to do something about it.
I'm going to keep an eye out for you.
I've got a lot of resin too.
I've seen a lot of resin in my life, and I've seen it too.
a network l.
I'll be there for you in ten days.
It's not the end of the ton.
It's not like I'm going to say anything.
There is no order to prevent it from happening again.
I've been wanting to do this ever since.
I can ask for money.
I'm not a guy.
Benjan w made me too young to live.
Or you can put them away.
Jason is a great guy.
On the people who make Li mando
Thank you very much for joining us.
I feel like I'm a fan.
I'm here to help you.
I'm going to do a lot of stuff.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
I'm behind the good stuff.
Well, as if I were you, I'd be a very good person.
Anon and pren mann are so good.
I just want to know if Miche kirch a pri l m ap di Miche
A child is born.
I'm coming back to them.
I'm going back to my father again.
It's a different story.
I'm going to have a little bit of fun.
Non li pap is back again.
I was retouched.
It's not about the country.
I'm going to tell you everything.
But all is well.
I can't wait to get started.
You're not going to get it right.
They're on the wine list.
Why am I here?
They're wearing masks and they're sick.
W ap di Ou e gare
Or even the same.
Or even the chap of the book.
I've got my own chap.
It's either on my shoulders or on my shoulders.
Or be the one who needs to get in and out.
The men were carrying an akitim.
What is it, or what is it?
I can make or break the Boulot la t ap Andre
There is no one else.
Or pale bou lin fwon thing for you.
Men have to go through it.
Take it or leave it.
It's not the end of the world.
On the understanding of human beings.
People who are sick, however, are coming.
They're going to be the ones who are going to be the ones who are going to be the ones who are going to be the ones who are going to be the ones who are going to be the ones who are going to be the ones who are going to be the ones who are going to be the ones who are going to be the ones who are going to be the ones who are going to be the ones who are going to be the ones who are going to be the ones who are going to be the ones who are going to be the ones who are going to be the ones who are going to be the
Despite the illness they are coming.
Or even if they're sick, they're coming.
Why do you want to bet?
People who are sick are coming.
I don't know why you can bet.
Bon an an  alo alo alo
It's either that or it's that.
They're sick because they're sick.
Or believe it because it's good.
They're sick and tired.
It's either done or it's done or it's something else.
There is no cure for the disease.
I don't know what to do with myself if I'm sick.
They come to your work to make you happy.
Men do not know if the mother or child is working.
I'm going to ask you how your kids are doing.
It's time for a mother or a child to go to school.
I can't wait to get out of here.
However, if you know of anyone who may be eligible for a commission, please contact us.
It's the first time I've ever met someone like that.
Men or women are not the only ones.
The commission may also be li
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm going to sit on the committee and ask for help.
The commission will be able to see if I can pick up the pieces.
Men don't really know if they're going to cost a commission or not.
Good or bad?
This is not the way to see you.
It's the kind of person who does it.
There's something in the house or something I need to do at home.
The men were asleep as they were when they arrived at the same place.
They do not take wine from the people who do not take things from them.
men or ta like se yo.
If you want to live your life in boukman w things with you.
I'm not ready to put you on the spot.
I'm going to tell you.
You don't know what I'm going to say.
I'll tell you what.
Then, if you seek wisdom, you will find wisdom, but the stars will look good on you.
If Boaz didn't come back for more than a week, then Boaz didn't come back for more than a week.
Okay, so you want to admit it?
Admeton and w pa vini vi as many as a bay yo.
Okay, vanm sinzadi or, yey, or what do you do?
You're going to school.
Men or women go to school and something happens to them.
I don't even know what your problem is.
It's best to get to know someone.
When I was in high school, I said something or something.
If you're in school or not.
Good things come to you.
It's going to be a long day or a long day at school, and it's going to be a long day at school.
Or, in the case of an order of the day, an order of the day.
Ten of them went to school.
I'm going to give it a try.
Li jan or will di lanm
If I'm going to make it, I'm going to make it.
Se as senate where they go to school.
Se sa M ta like on vann.
It's one of my favorite things about water.
Every single one of you has done a good job of it.
I'm working hard to get people to know me.
We're finally getting the job done.
It's going to be something that's going to make a difference in the lives of those around you.
I'm not going back to work.
I'm going to post my first post.
It's not just me, it's me, it's you, it's me, it's you, it's me.
I'm going to tell you this.
There are people who want to work for me.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm not going to work anymore.
You know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
It's not like I don't have men.
I'm a man of my dreams.
I'm not going to say it again.
After I meet my wife, who am I supposed to be?
What can you say?
When I see you, who do you think I am?
If I see you now, who can I do this to?
You can come back again.
What's that again?
That's right, pwap your di.
w ap where the result of a person's wine appears
It is derived from the word "men".
I want to make sure that I know where I'm coming from.
WAP comes from a person who has arrived.
I've never had a problem with it before.
W ap di an an sotim or will di an an
That's why it's so important for people to be aware of what's going on.
Bon or pa gen orderye an or may be sa again
and chak che wès or pa ta gen orderye an or di sa again
This is the first time I've seen it.
I'll tell you what it is.
You can talk to someone or something.
Or do you want people to know about it?
Whether it's on the floor or on the floor, it's just one of those things.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm very proud of you.
Appropriately, they do not have the right to remain silent.
Gen l or gen l
One of the most important things I've ever done.
I've got something to say.
Or you could say that you're a big paray bondiv.
It's not like I don't know what I'm talking about, it's like I don't know what I'm talking about, it's like I don't know what I'm talking about, it's like I don't know what I'm talking about, it's like I don't know what I'm talking about.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
This is a great paray bondiv.
It's not like they're just going to be there for a month or so.
It's not like you're going to be able to do anything about it.
In the middle of the day, I'd like to go to the bathroom.
Who knows how the sun goes down all the time?
I'm going to tell you a secret.
There's a lot more to it than that.
The sun is setting all over the mountain.
I've known him since.
It has been a long time coming.
It's time to move on.
Since then, we've been able to do what we've been doing.
I'm looking forward to seeing what I can do.
I'm going to do it.
That's what they did.
Ap m such as d pawa m
That's the only way I know what to do.
Ap m such as d pawa
I don't know if I'll make them like me or I'll make them like me or I'll make them like me.
They're making fun of me.
They make it look like a joke.
But the good news is that even the bagal has to be removed.
It's not like you're going to work or have kids do it.
men or know how to work as a
I'm going to do a good job and I'm going to do a good job.
It's the kind of work you like to do, and it's similar to the kind of work you want to do.
I'm doing a job or something and I don't want to talk about it.
In order to generate an order, you can do it again.
I'm not sure what to say.
On who knows what you're talking about.
They put their heads in your lap.
It's time to move on.
Or to send two of them to do it.
They're not going to be able to keep up with us.
An ap wop a gen order yon okadi an an sa again
They're doing it like they're doing it.
It's like having a man in the men's room.
I don't know what I'm talking about.
I can't wait to see you.
M pa t wè
or appear on li we
Or from someone else.
I don't know what to do about it.
on those who have died.
Or don't know
or get Mche.
There is no such thing as a complete phase.
I don't know
Is there something about death or don't you know?
You don't know if you're going to die.
For example, on some people, you can say yes.
Do you know the men's or women's health at home?
If vinyl t ap vin at home or componn
It's about a man and a woman.
It's been going on since the dawn of time.
Tell me I don't know anything about Silvin behind me.
I can't wait to see you all.
m is derived from m granm maten a.
The thing I know how to make the bag, what is the relay?
I don't know if I'm going to be able to get out of my grandmother's house.
Something I don't know how to do with a bag.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it.
I'm going to the bank and I'm going to the bank.
It is derived from the granum matten a m
It's better than that.
The banking sector is not going to be able to keep up with demand.
Or you can't do that anymore.
Anmen wè don don or pa know if m pa konn to wine after m
We've known each other since the time of our grandmothers until we've had wine after dinner.
They really don't want to work and they don't want to work anymore.
I've got a lot of money.
I've been drinking wine for a while.
or li vin in parese
The right of the people to live in the country is the right of the people to live in the country.
I'm not going to say I'm an Englishman.
The Anglican Church is at the forefront of its work.
It's time for you to know.
In the meantime, the people are moving forward.
How can I ever get back together again?
It's the only thing I can do.
I'm on my way.
Now we're on another ticket again.
Or I'll put it on the table.
Your teeth are going to be good.
w ap try to take l
In the meantime, there is a shortage of epi.
I know it's hard.
I'm going to try to do something to make money or to make money.
Or do an espo or take a stand against a crowd or something.
This is the first time I've ever had to change my mind.
It's all I can say about you.
I'm going to renmondi men or I'm going to buy this and I'm going to miss it.
Or do an espresso or take a drink or a drink.
If you're going to make a living or make an espo on the beach, you're not going to make a living out of it.
Or make an escort to the museum.
Or you may not be able to do so.
Or make an espo at the end of the trip to the museum.
The order of the gen is not to be confused with the order of the gen.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do this again.
In order to avoid Alaska, I have to go to the museum.
I'm going to put it on the table.
Or take a cup of tea.
I live in Alaska.
Or make an ispo.
Continue or make an ispo
Take it or leave it.
Take it or leave it.
I know who you are.
It's a good way to get to know your kids.
It's a waste of time or school.
The papitoral metye so w ap begins to so so
The children's team will be able to do the same thing.
W ap lost time or school
Papitoral is the mety.
No, as long as I'm alive, I'd like to re-read it, but to put things in front of it.
If someone does it, they will do it.
It's all right.
Or that it's the same in the garden.
This is the epicenter of the story.
One or two of these people are devò
I'm not sure if it's either E or E.
How do you know if you're going to be able to do it?
He lost his Tanp Nonon.
Outside I'm going to make my way home.
I'm going to tell you a secret about the whole thing.
outside of the building.
It's the first time I've seen it.
K ap pale outside a a
Do you want to talk about it or do you want to talk about it?
Well, how are you?
Oh, the bond is there.
You will also receive a card.
I'm going to repeat the same thing.
It's going to be a rematch of men's lives.
Or put it in front of me.
I've lost my tea.
When a child goes to school, he loses his schooling.
On the other hand, if you want to get a good fit in front of you, can you get a good fit in front of you?
There are two types of men.
There is no such thing as "a" or "a".
On the other hand, there is a good chance that you will be able to do a good job.
It's the only thing I can do.
I'm going to school too much.
If you don't have enough time to eat, pass or lose all your food.
I lost everything I had to drink.
It's all in a day's work or something like that.
It's ok now you're going to have to take care of it.
Toufou bon chan yo konn di ba yo to yo yo myself also pitet m
Bakon ordered chan or ka di sa
I'm going to tell you how I'm going to do it.
It's a lot less than that.
I'm sure there's more to it than meets the eye.
I don't know how I'm going to do it.
Siyon won't give up my card again
I've been drinking wine since I was a kid.
If you're only good at it, you can do it.
I met you on the other side of the bay behind me.
I'm here to help you.
I'm very skilled at it.
Or you can say it too.
I've always been a skilled wine maker.
I will give this wine to your people and I will give it to you.
I'm sure you'll be able to enjoy the wine.
Yes, well, well, for example, there is a new wine.
What do you do, what do you do, what do you do, what do you do, what do you do, what do you do?
It's not like they're doing anything wrong.
There are seven pairs of pairs.
They're seven in a row.
The answer to this question is that there is no replacement card.
They're in the middle of it all.
Do chita tankò Pa gen lòt jwon dis again
Donpou gene right in the
W passing through the pale
I've been waiting for you to come up with a new name.
Yes, the one who does the talking, the brother who does the talking.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
I've heard of four words in my own words.
Brothers and sisters, greet each other with different words.
It's going to be good.
Where I'm going to talk to you, I'm going to be okay.
I've always wanted to be a father.
Or do something about it.
I'm so grateful to be on the map.
I'm sure I'll be able to make it to my dad's house.
If I met won't do anything before I do it on the coast or in the papam
I'm in the mood for something.
This is what I'm going to do next week.
I'm not going to say.
Back to where I was born.
That's why I'm here.
I'm going to go back to where I came from.
That's why I'm here.
I'm going to go back to where I came from.
I can't wait to open it.
I'm going to go back to where I came from.
or condition.
That's what I'm going to do before I do it.
That's what I'm going to do before I do it.
I'm sorry, but I'm not sure if my husband or grandfather is now home again.
I'm going to say something small or something I'm going to miss or put it in the middle of my face.
There's a lot more to it than that.
I'm not drinking wine now at home.
Fache with m
There are two ways to do this.
Because now he's at home.
They don't have a face.
There are many types of men.
If I'm standing in front of you, I'm standing in front of you.
I'm not going to do it.
Or look at the time.
Or wait until it's too late.
Is the menmout still there?
Or you're going to pass me OK
The people of the city of Siel are the ones who need to be cleaned up.
Wash your hands.
Wash your hands.
It's hard to use it with men and women.
They've got a lot of talent.
You can't beat yourself up.
They're fine with the men they're wearing.
All right, answer me again.
They're with me.
They've got a lot of good men and women.
It's such a beautiful thing.
I'm going to wash my men.
I'm not sure how many times I've read it.
Then again, I'm not going to take it anymore.
It's hard for people to want to put something first, to hear something, or to put something first.
I'm going to tell you what's going on.
I don't know what to do with myself.
If you don't mind, I'll give you my luggage or I'll give you my barrel.
Or do you want to be a man or a woman, or do you want to be a barrister?
Two, or not, or not, or not, or not, or not.
My voice is not coming, I am not coming.
It's not me, it's not you.
Now, you don't have to wait for me to come, I won't come.
I'm here to help.
I don't know.
Gen pa egzanpon people e ap antre
Enter the room from which the person leaves.
I asked him how many people entered the room.
It's a good thing you're here.
It's been a long time coming.
It's not a good time to go to the bathroom.
Or you can't just do it.
As o tou
How can you say that?
A few days later, I came out of nowhere to see Andri.
I'm coming from a man named Andri.
I'm going to have to change my car.
They're the ones who've got it all figured out.
It's time to get back to the machine.
Why are you here again?
If you don't have a car, you'll need to repair the car and repair it.
It's not about you, it's all about a relay.
I'd like to buy a car for men.
I don't know what I'm going to say.
We'd love to buy a car and have a problem with it.
To be honest, I know 11 people have lost their lives.
They lost their mother Wap di Mche lost their leader
They lost their lead.
They lost even the papacy.
They don't lose the touch of the same bagal and keep going.
They've lost your demon.
The men are still alive.
They've lost too much in front of all my people.
The men who wanted to lose their heads to my dad.
My father and I are all men.
There are two kinds of people who have won the words.
I'm going to end up saying no. I'm not going to say no.
They don't want to know what they're talking about.
The wife of Nil didn't know about it.
I don't even know what I'm talking about.
Okay, I don't know if it's good or bad, or if it's bad, I don't know.
I don't even know.
Okay, well, whatever it is, it's difficult too, you know.
Or, by way of example, by way of an ap goumen vay example.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
Men canmèv li like to goumen
How do you know what's going on?
Or they don't say anything but love to fight.
I'm not laughing too much.
There is no direct interface I like to goumen men limou
Men are not alone.
They love to play with men.
It's not like anyone else is doing it.
They're not doing their job.
I'm working on a work order.
Working on people's welfare is an important part of the job.
I'm in the mood for Oh!
Okay, or can you do the man's job?
Whatever the case may be.
It's the only thing in the hotel with a drap.
It's either good or bad.
People have the right to do what they want.
Or I can do the job well or I can do the job well.
It's the only thing I can do.
It's like a website where you're doing it.
You'll never see me again.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do next.
It's just not working.
Or gen debay a la, or pakun ki is the man and the seven, sa w ap di?
W ap di swazi ke, sa w ou li?
Two, w ap di yeah, what's the seventh?
It's a sign of the times.
It's not just me, it's you, it's me.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it.
It's not like you're going to die.
How do you know what you want?
Do you want me to go or do you want me to go or do you want me to go or do you want me to go or do you want me to go or do you want me to go or do you want me to go or do you want me to go or do you want me to go or do you want me to go or do you want me to go or do you want me to go?
Do you know or can you tell us?
E, for example, a person a rache, a thing or two?
I asked him how he felt about the situation.
It's also important to know what I'm looking for.
I want to make sure that I have the right to vote if I want to make any changes.
or gen dwa rache any
or rache zone yo
It's not just a prayer.
Yon jan salat is the only way.
or gen dwaache zonjan
I'm not sure who you are.
They're stealing things from people's homes.
They take other things as well.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it.
It's not easy to talk about it.
Or, for example, if you're looking for someone to take care of you, you're looking for someone to take care of you.
They were taken as a gift and they were taken as a gift.
I don't know if he's going to be able to take the lead or not.
And I'm not going to say anything about it.
You can't or won't.
Or if you're going to give me an answer.
Take them as a gift.
I took it as a gift.
And I'm not going to say anything about it.
On the one hand, on the other, on the other hand, they do a lot of things, so I can come.
You don't have to tell me anything or come to me to do it all.
You can sit or you can come and do it all for me.
It's either here or there.
I've seen it all before.
It's the first time I've seen it.
The head of the person who knows how to use it is called the head of the person who knows how to use it.
It's not about the hair.
Let's see if the battery is running.
I've seen it all before.
Whoever's right is not going to say anything or come.
I can tell you what to do and how to do it all.
If you can tell me what to do, I'm going to do everything I can to help you.
It's all about releasing everything.
Or, in the case of a person, something that is a bit too big to come by a couple of times.
I'm not sure if I want to do this or not.
I'm not going to tell you the beginning or the end of it.
You can't beat them.
Pwis pliske boutè too
Don't force yourself to do anything.
I don't want to see you again.
You've lost a lot of money.
Enfi sw ap di la
If one releases another, one releases the other.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
This is why I'm here.
Or afterwards if you don't.
Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, what?
Non swajan, or what?
swajan or mak, or to say again if, se swajan, you menmak, or otherwise you di mnen, swajan or genmak, on the person doing that.
We have two jobs.
Even though they're sitting on the floor, they can't do it.
I'm at work.
Okay, either well or slowly, I'm going to work.
I'm going to talk to you while you're at it.
while I'm at work.
Children's games.
I'm going to work for you.
Or of the children as they may become children.
Or you can say it.
This is why we are here to help you.
or pa wine
It's not like I'm going to work for a living.
Or use some of the phrases I've heard before.
Even as a child, I've had a lot of trouble getting a job.
Wi men, you are the people of tandiske.
Let's have a look at it.
Look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look,
Well, look at one or two examples, do it, do it, on janson, menpi, and l bay la.
What's the point of running away from a man who doesn't want to do anything?
It's not a country.
Are you ready for the next generation?
That's why I'm doing the right thing.
I know how to ask someone if I can't make it to Edofestèl bay odiyès ki w ap gen
It's either that or that.
A good or bad card is a person's gift and a reason why they don't like it.
Sanje mom of dou kanp.
Whether you're ahead of or behind a player, why not go ahead and play?
Well, in the meantime, why don't you use it, too?
Do you, my friend, think about it?
How do you take the new ones to the next level if there is only one old one that covers or deals with poverty?
Don't worry, we're not alone.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
One of the players who wanted to make a difference in the game was a serious player.
Ap tann player who wanted to be the term gravay
The card is either a good key or a good one.
Ap tann player who wanted to win the prize.
I'm not sure if this is a serious problem.
I'm going to tell you that Dichon won't do it again.
It's a lot of money, and it's a lot of money.
You will be rewarded with a reward in heaven.
It's a great way to get back on track.
And then there's another one.
I don't know anything else.
Koum akonn sa yo rele Baakwa, on retwal gre so wou, wou, wou did you know?
It's not enough to live well, but it's enough to live well.
on kon retwa ap bakou
It's the same as krele Baakwa.
on pou gen entwèl.
We're going to get them out of Baakwa.
I don't want to give up on you, but I want to give up on you.
I feel sorry for them.
Bakou ay ek leve before the m
It's not about the people.
There's a lot of people out there who want to be a part of it.
I'm not sure what's going on.
I'm going to live a life.
Akwal Men will know that Ak Bakou is no longer related to Chou.
Bon men or kon sa yo releté yo releté and chou
An bon apré bakou or konn or retwal is relegated to the pou Siè
Men or women are not allowed to talk to each other.
Well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, well,
Now, now, now, now, Byaté, and when I get to the next level or what I can do to get to the next level, I'm sick.
What can you do to pay for the concert?
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
If I can, I can't.
There's something else you should know.
We're going to have to do something about it.
or pa vle di
There is no problem.
I'm in front of you.
If there is a problem with you, there is no other problem.
It's like a birthday party.
apri first january
and others before you know it.
An an a se person sen legliz
It could be the birthday of a pet, or another birthday.
Is there a seventh one?
The feast is celebrated on the feast of the Annunciation, the feast of the Annunciation, the feast of the Annunciation, the feast of the Annunciation, the feast of the Annunciation, the feast of the Annunciation, the feast of the Annunciation, the feast of the Annunciation, the feast of the Annunciation, the feast of the Annunciation, the feast of the Annunciation, the feast of the Annunciation, the feast of the Annunciation, the
Mate, I've been doing this for more than a year.
Well, yeah, after what, do I tell you about a party, how good is it, or don't you even know what a Sunday, a Sunday pat is?
The book is, it's called the sanp la won booku, good, li good, yoda, yoda, yoda, yoda, yoda, yoda, yoda, yoda, yoda, yoda, you know.
Well, then, you can give me a composition on what I take for granted.
Yes, as if I were to say yes.
Yep, I'll leave you two on the water kit thing.
It's not like I've ever heard of it.
I've been waiting a few months for you to come back.
I am confident that you will be able to keep up with the latest trends even if you don't know what to expect.
The little things I know about writing a lesson to a child are easier for those in school to know.
What should I do to get a certified drink?
A person who has learned a lesson already and has learned a lesson in the past will no longer be able to do it.
I'm going to replace the lesson.
I don't know how many kids are doing it.
Hey, why don't I do the Lipo?
That's because we're not complaining.
Because when people, for example, won a series of words, they won a series of words.
I'm your father.
I don't know if I'm going to use it or not.
Don't ask any questions about us.
For example, you can ask questions about people who have been imprisoned for a long time.
Yo an condanel
Or you can't order one again
I was sentenced to life in prison.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to keep up with my schedule.
A prison is a prison.
or bakon nou rele dam
or bakon nou sa
Something I know or want to say.
You know who you are in the game.
I'm not sure what I'm going to do.
But the good news is that I'll never know what to expect.
There's a lot more going on in the world.
Dalmari, Dalmari, how was I born?
Divo, li bay plèch, pou de bwa ou, pou l'ap an a, pou l'esne.
They are located on the genus branch.
It's not like I'm going to be able to keep up with the pace of things like this.
I don't know about women.
I'm going to be a big man right now.
In the end, the mout li pa pa gen
I don't know.
Yo pa tou on mal bet man
You can't have children even if you're stuck on one side or the other.
I don't know what I'm doing yet.
The men are perfect and I'm ready to go.
I've been waiting for you to come here.
I'm not allowed to come here.
I'm going to give you two pieces of advice even if you don't know what to do with it.
I bought a pound of tea.
I bought a square f from f.
It has been a long time since I was born.
I'm sure he'll come along.
de kouv now
As a matter of fact, as a matter of fact,
I'll tell you what I mean.
They are either met loaded or deck loaded.
I called him my wife.
I'm not the same man.
I asked them a question.
They know what they're doing.
I'm going to tell you what to eat for breakfast, and I'm going to tell you what to eat for breakfast.
This page is dedicated to fans of Jan Santibon.
I'm going to be maddened.
This is how they make men.
Genyenk Bèt pa egzanpon Malkbèt ki kon nou volou sou on do other li to have children
Bèt la mode
I'm going to buy a jiman horse.
Let's take a horse to my mommy's.
I'm going to walk a mile and a half.
If you have a horse, you will be able to fly another horse.
Nansis since a horse steals a horse, men can team up with a jeboul puddy.
Men are often asked the question of whether horses and other horses can bear children or not.
She's going to have another baby.
No, I'm going to have a baby.
So it's not just Millet, it's just me, it's bouni, it's going to be you, but it's going to be me and it's going to be me.
So, what's up with that?
If you're in love with Jofi, then you're in love with him.
I want my mother.
This is the kind of thing that makes me love you.
I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.
Because it's my mother.
They're right there with me.
They don't want me to.
This is how I feel about everyone else.
That's how they're doing it.
The pricing is based on the price of the product.
I am alive and well.
The price of a gout is very low.
The salt is turned into fish for water.
I'm going to the depot and I'm going to talk to you.
They're on their way.
Anjou lale, don't let monz, salt water and your brothers and sisters, come to the water with you.
I'm going to use the water.
I'm going to tell my friends about it.
The tears of my friend's tears.
You're going to have to make friends with your friends.
After many years they returned to Monlizye after two years together.
You are the angel of the gospel.
There is no need to make a whole lot of money out of it.
Menman enthek genmen la li
It's not just about the genome, it's also about the genome.
They are menman man.
They're living at home.
If we do not see the Earth, we will see the Earth.
Anywhere in the world.
You're not living in your own home.
I've been singing for years.
With my friend Montèzen
The guy's going to be back in the saddle.
They don't come to me.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to do it again.
I don't know what else to do.
5 voyay yon jouman kounjou
Fi y ap wine men
He is a member of the Council on Foreign Relations.
I'm going to give you a gift bag.
Men's bags are not carried when they come out.
I don't know where I'm going.
I'm the only one who has the bag when the boss is in the kitchen or in the kitchen.
Monjou, mother of the water, mother of the water region, mother li.
Give my friends tea, give my friends tears, give my friends tea.
A season of good friends.
I'm going to start with you.
Flap on the man for the fish.
A fish is a fish.
I'm a fisherman and I'm a fisherman.
I live in his home.
They retired from the game.
They put you on your docliz te nou
They're trying to make a difference.
I'm sure you'll be able to find it.
If you don't have a man, you don't have a man, you don't have a man, you don't have a man.
If you're looking at the right side, you're looking at the right side.
You don't know what the right bag is.
Are you going to ban me from networking again?
I have a problem with it.
Zanyi mann desan w gen li di a
I'm going to have a problem with it.
I'm looking forward to seeing you at home.
There are two main types of soda in the country.
You've got to know your mother.
My mother's mother's mother.
There is no such thing as a man's heart.
It's just a matter of time before you know it.
I've got my heart set on two things.
He's got your back and he's got your back and he's got your back.
I'm going to tell you a few things.
Tenzen is your name.
Li pa w pasye
They don't want to go through with it.
I'm a friend of a friend.
I don't have any friends.
I want to make friends with men.
Chake banzan men and I have a tenzen
Tenzen has lost many friends.
My best friends are coming down and down.
I'm going to take a look at my mother's face.
It's a beautiful way to get down to the bottom of my mother's throat.
Koke, w fini, j j'm bien content, se sa m m réel defection m, Amesya, the son of Lamech's wife, who ap tire one account of your bouki.
Either way, the ravitya will become a parliamentary candidate.
I won't be able to keep my hands off the men.
I'm going to high school right now, and I'm going to high school right now.
It is a secret society of men.
It's a lot of fun.
I'm on my mother's side.
I'm on top of the men.
I'm at the top of the men's table.
Ap Se Sa Mali tmen sef
Mali t al kouche ta kay li
Li di Bouk is based on the releases.
Bouki's response to the question was that Mali should not be punished if Bouki did not respond to the question.
Mali tmen gen ta men Bouki dey men
They will answer you
Mali is divided into two parts.
Mali gen ravi.
I'm going to tell you something.
I'm going to take it easy.
Bouk ale agri
It's about a thousand miles away.
They don't have to walk.
I don't know now
Aponmen of men
It's time to make a cup of coffee.
Women are more likely to be in trouble.
It's because we don't have it.
My wife and I didn't do it as well as I did.
or di bouki
This book is about men who have been killed.
The book is written in the form of a poem.
The men of Levi are also present.
The book is dedicated to his mother.
I'm very happy with it.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it or not.
I'm going out.
Li, I'm going to throw it away, or I'm going to give it to you.
After all, I've been able to get some water, I've been sick, I've been sick, I've been sick.
On mari fran m lan, fran m lan, or mayad, mad, m al plen l pou o?
For the wife, who will be fully satisfied, of the benefit of the credit, or of the money, you should take Mali.
This book is not about you.
I'm going to cut the book off.
It's a lot of fun to work with.
Seyou said this hand and tou Bouk la
Bouk li Bouk ante labou
I'm going to tell you about it.
They're not going to come back.
They can't afford to pay rent.
I'm going to tell you about the lab.
They don't have to pay the rent.
The book is titled  epi epi.
I'm not going to lie to you.
I can't wait to get to the next one.
He listened to the man's voice.
Bouki Lin or Bouki Lin
I'm not even in Mali.
or vil ale
There's no such thing as a free lunch.
I can tell you all about it.
It's hard to believe that I'm working for men.
The men and women of the village are happy.
There is a ton of code.
I'm a good man.
I'm looking forward to seeing you.
Doukye ale lan france nan paran y ap tout goyini
I'm going to kill you if you want to kill me.
I'm going to code the men up.
Who am I, who am I, who am I, who am I, who am I, who am I, who am I, who am I, who am I, who am I, who am I, who am I, who am I, who am I, who am I, who am I, who am I, who am I, who am I, who am I, who am I, who am I?
I'm going to take a look at it, I'm going to take a look at it, I'm going to take a look at it, I'm going to take a look at it, I'm going to take a look at it, I'm going to take a look at it, I'm going to take a look at it, I'm going to take a look at it, I'm going to take a look at it, I'm going to take a look at it, I'm going to take a look at it, I'm going to
Manlis men are rooting for a tea.
m ap cutting code mann
You are banned from Malis
They're doing the same book.
They had to cut the code.
You don't know what to do.
I'm with you on the bay.
I've got a gram of people who want to go out and do a lot of things.
I'm going to try to get my grandmother to edit it.
I'm not going to kill you.
I'm going to kill you all and I'm going to kill you all.
I can't wait to see it.
Gen mwen la love m or lalbòt dwa
That's the way it is or even that's the way it is.
They're my grandmother.
The prize of non-grandmother
I'm not a man.
I don't think I'm going to make it that far.
Or even if it is so Tanda dede
He is a great-grandfather.
I don't know what to say about La Côte Crab.
It's like a crab or even a crab.
Mari di penba
Okay, can you still do it?
Daniel Nikola is going to be Bannon's boss.
I'm with you on this one.
They're going to blow the whistle.
on the gran moun
On his wife's win
on the son of his wife's wife.
They're telling you.
That's why I'm here.
My sons and daughters.
I feel like I'm winning.
It's like giving a gift to someone who's already gone.
They're not going to be able to do anything about it.
I can't wait to see what people do in my pocket.
They're the ones who've got you.
I sing them when I'm good.
He is married to his wife, M. Fwon March.
Looking at the big car, I'm tired of the big machya yo
They're going to have to take some time off when they're going to have to pay the bills.
I'm a big fan of the release.
I want you to know that you're right.
That's right, that's right, that's right, that's right, that's right.
I'm going to try my hand at it.
My mother was there.
madanmi and ap macha.
And I'm going to make a decision.
Con kote or prale epa
This is because one of them is still alive.
From where I'm going to go.
And then there's the fullness of it.
and up the plenn
Because it's going to get me up there.
von y from far away.
The sun is like this.
I'm going to give it a try.
Come up to the top of the stairs.
There's a lot more going on up there.
And I'm going up the stairs.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that.
Chak tab li mayen devale sa
Maté N'man has risen to your feet.
Take up the chairs or comman di devale sa
I'm not going upstairs.
It's a great feeling to hear from you!
Men have the right to vote for women who have sex with men.
Women are more likely to get pregnant than men.
There are a few minutes left in the morning.
Three times a pilgyab appears.
You've got a lot to learn about.
With all the rache that I'm ravikou a.
Zanm te ravikou kay akou
ravikou ka yo as an asan
Ravikou is not a ras.
You are the one who denies it.
The men will lose.
Because it's all about me.
Jakouwipizan m sa and my coat of arms.
There is no need for a petition.
They say they're not going to be able to do it.
mann de yon twa and gen m of such
It's like a human being, but it's not like it's a human being.
It takes a lot of time to get to the next level.
They are not a group of people, but they are a group of people.
You've got your hands full.
You've got a lot of money to buy.
I'm a fan of the fin coppi with you.
They have the right to remain silent, but they also have the right to remain silent.
It's not like my daughter.
In a new generation of people, I'm going to use the grid of grenn aponbò
We are not a group of people.
And then we're back to the same thing as Tinto.
Tinto gab orbe is like a
Se mwen manm pri kan go boulou a de paran nou m ap lost
I'm not going to say anything about it.
Nevatè and grenl of jounirite on grenn aponbò
You've got to take the other right grenn lan
Now we have 2 grenn aponbò
It's worth it.
Where are you going?
Members of the Congolese parliament have lost a lot of money in the past week.
Don't give up on me.
Anman te is also chan ti tou
The ink can be cut into a bra.
You don't have to cut a bra.
Keep in mind the color of the filler.
You may have menvirite.
On the surface of the cell.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make a big deal out of it.
I've lost a lot of weight.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it to the next level.
Do I stay on grennen and salt?
Anman is not the only one who has taken this account.
The ink can be cut like a.
The ink is not cut off.
You're going to have to go back and buy it again.
I can take others to grennen and net yo sèl grenn nè
I'm not going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you, I'm going to lie to you
I'm going to take a look at it.
If my mother had a great deal of money to spare, I would lose it.
This is my parameter.
There is no wine on the net.
It's the same as the previous generation.
Men can't win a race against the grain.
The men and the beast.
My grandmother couldn't stand the sight of me sitting there.
An adult in the Tibetan plateau.
I'm going to the grand bay.
I've been waiting for you to come to my place.
It's not the end of the world, it's the end of the world.
I'm going to tell you a story.
What do you do when you're sick?
If we are to go on a journey to a new parameter, then we must go on a journey to a new parameter.
A ras avarano anata
vin resta orite
The woman did not give birth again.
I'm going to try to get a copy of it.
If you want to win the same amount of money, you can win the next round, but you can't win the next round.
With men and the elderly and the elderly.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
It's not the same person.
I'm going to take a look at it.
The new men are still there.
Who's going to say that?
I'm going to give you a divititman.
I can't wait to get my hands on a new one.
and also as ale prap
I'm not going to lie.
Divine choke of advancement free of charge when you take it.
They cut the canyon's edge and left it there.
I cut the canyon shore and let you go.
There is no such thing as a genus.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
Take them with you.
You have to do something about it.
I've lost a lot of money.
They are taken as a whole.
They take it as a gift.
I'm going to take a few minutes to remember what I've been through.
I would like to know if you can remember me freely.
I don't think I'm going to be able to make it to the next level.
I've lost a lot of weight.
If you want to be a member of Congress, you have to be a member of Congress and you have to be a member of Congress.
I have lost my Adada.
My grandfather had appeared before me.
The end is near.
You can't just prove it.
The potatoes were cut before the end of the day.
It's a man's world and a man's world.
It's a man's time to move on.
After the cutting off of the ve chen yo chen yo party
And I'm going to think about it, and I'm going to think about it, and I'm going to think about it, and I'm going to think about it, and I'm going to think about it, and I'm going to think about it, and I'm going to think about it, and I'm going to think about it, and I'm going to think about it, and I'm going to think about it, and I'm going to think about it, and I'm going to think about it, and I'm going to
Pye ale, yo pa t kouk ale, men, yo wine koufikò of yo pa pa yon Japanese ale.
Levi jou nou group pa z lo, t ap men, pi janbe dòy pa kanjanbe dwo a.
My grandmother's criteria are dioly, if ap, ap, ap, ap, dwache dijanbe, dòt la rete fè, ap, ap, ap, ap, dwache, dijanbe, tan janbe.
It's the first time I've heard of a man who's been killed.
I'm a woman and I'm a woman and I'm a woman and I'm a woman and I'm a woman and I'm a woman and I'm a woman and I'm a woman and I'm a woman and I'm a woman and I'm a woman and I'm a woman and I'm a woman and I'm a woman and I'm a woman and I'm a woman and I'm a woman and I'm a woman and I'm a woman and I'm a woman and I'm a woman and
They cut off the head of a man who had only one woman.
It's just a matter of time before I get to know you.
Finish the drawing of pi savi for l.
The essence of this will be for you.
They're in the middle of the pack.
They cut off women's heads.
They started a fight with a woman.
I'm fine and I'm going to go with this woman, I'm going with you, I'm going with you, I'm going with you, I'm going with you, I'm going with you, I'm going with you, I'm going with you, I'm going with you, I'm going with you, I'm going with you, I'm going with you, I'm going with you, I'm going with you, I'm going with you, I'm going with you, I'm going with you
Okay, I'm Nicholas, I'm Nicholas, I'm Nicholas, and I'm against the two of you.
Men, you know, you're the guy who's been here.
The man's wife came and sought him out.
The men are looking for you.
Li li to vin narab nou rak la chache bwa
They've been waiting for you.
Li gade yon is the same as rich narab
It's not just a matter of who you are.
There are so many people out there who are looking for a poem.
It's a good man or a good man.
It's only a few minutes away.
Do you have snow, snow for snow?
There's a lot of snow on the ground.
I'm going to have the same problem.
I've always wanted to be a governor.
Men or women or as new governments.
I'm going to go with you.
pi to orderou
It's like a.
Do you know how many?
They don't know Maounbe.
Do you know the party?
Fè, mèt kon, mèt kok fè, koukou, koukou, tika san sò, genyen, mèt bò and dèyè moun.
They look back, they see grenn people.
I'm going to tell you a story.
There are male cocktails.
It's not like I'm going to die.
If you're going to do that, yes.
The male toipal la
The men came from behind the men.
Step back and hold the non-gen.
I'm the same horse.
They're going to have to cut down on three pieces of paper.
I don't want to be in a relationship with you.
I'm going to call you on the phone.
Yo men keep the gen non well di
The metric of the asset is
I want to turn it into a vinid la
So much so that I've decided to go ahead.
It's like a masterpiece.
I'm so sorry about that.
There's no need for tea.
I'm going back and forth, and I'm going back and forth.
I want to be one of those people that I love.
They are opposed to the bikes.
Who are you and what's going on?
You will not be able to use the new weight.
I'm going after the people behind the people behind the people behind the people behind the people.
I'm sure you'll be able to keep up with the latest trends.
There's nothing I can do about it.
I'm going to have a good time.
Met ka ma won't be me
What is the meaning of al pwidiviyan or Bouwit?
It's been a while.
Eskon is the savior of pw.
He is one of the most powerful men in the world.
I'm not the gangoub.
against the making of Bell.
It's a great way to meet people.
It's a great way to get to my limit.
It's a great way to get rid of a limited number of men.
I'm sure you'll be able to use it for a short while.
It's a very short story.
That's why I'm at the top of my game.
I'm about to disappear.
I passed them to keep the grain.
Let's keep the wheat on the table.
You've got a lot going on here.
It's a lot of fun.
Use them to keep the gene laren
Keep the gen alive.
The term also refers to both.
You've got to do what you've got to do.
It's hard to believe that you've been able to pull the trigger.
It's not like it's my fault.
There is no shortage of grasshoppers.
I ran away from home.
If you know I'm going to lose, you're going to lose.
Yo fa tout
It's a good way to get started.
I'm not sure if I'll ever be able to get to know you.
I'm going to tell you something.
Men are also not priye l jwobye.
My mother-in-law recounted the mileage.
I'm counting miles and I can't wait to get started.
We're going to win.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it.
The back of the car is not a mile away.
I'm going to make a pencil.
It's about a mile away.
I'm going to try to make it as easy as I can.
There are a couple of reasons for this.
Are you sleeping or were you sleeping?
When I pass, do I have the right to remain silent, do I have the right to remain silent, and do I have the right to remain silent?
Dental hygiene is the most common type of dental hygiene.
As a great woman.
Gansou doesn't know how to do this.
I ran away from home.
I ran and didn't know what to do.
I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it.
I've lost my way.
You're going against the grain of sheep.
There are many ways to make a man.
He walked behind the curtain.
Some of them are new.
I don't have a lot to say about it.
I'm going to try to find a way to get rid of them.
Kouten igle came from the sea.
men while they were there.
While some of the cabad
He knows that all the great animals are greater than him.
It's also the tip of the iceberg.
You're in love with me.
You can't save them.
I'm here to help you.
Do you have an edition that you can't read?
What do you want them to do or else.
I'm very happy with it.
The tanks are well equipped to handle the weather.
I'm going to try to get my hands on this one, but I'm not going to get my hands on this one.
It's either me or you.
You're talking about how much of a car Ken has.
I have a bra man.
or sheep.
Menmi is also very good.
I'm going to have to go back to Mouton to get my hands on it.
Who are the people in the Soviet Union?
Mouton for two cars.
I'm not sure if I'll be able to see it.
They've got a network of them.
They watched two mouton turn into a man from the console.
There are people out there who don't care.
I can't walk or sheep to take your man and I won't give up.
It's like a panther or a sheep.
I'm in the mood for something new.
on kouk con niko
Jenon himself has seen the video Mèt Bwa tè.
It's the first time I've ever had a cup of tea.
They're going to school.
with men and other men.
It's not like I'm going to be able to do it myself.
It's all the way to the top.
I can't wait to see you in Mouton.
You've got two toys to play with.
A man who wants to kill a sheep is a man who wants to kill a sheep.
I'm going to try to make a sheep out of a sheep, but I'm not going to make a sheep out of a sheep.
The earth is a lake of water.
I'm not going to lie to you.
Because since you've been a sheep, you've been a mechanic.
There is no such thing as a free lunch.
Fou yon moun al dou yon mouton, mouton, mechan lalawou l, di l limon, epavè.
Now Jeremiah believes that there is a new way of life.
It's like having a new bag.
When the horse's hair is black, the black crystals are black and the angel's hair is black.
I don't know if I'm going to be able to make it to soukey soukey jwis.
I'm going to take the Exam and I'm going to blog about it.
As soon as a book is published, they will not be able to complete a visa.
Men, ap ple vizye a si elevejye a, eswaelevejye a.
Raise the price of Makout, but book a timal sa or lacharje se non of Makout.
I'm going to take Makou and I'm going to go to Malsalè, and I'm going to bouki or lal konn difir, and I'm going to Malis.
The derivative of gen l is derived from the derivative of gen l.
I'm here to help you.
I can't wait to get started.
There is no limit to the number of times.
They gave the children a book and a book.
The boy bouki or I take li
The Pope's papal bull.
I have come to you, Papal people, people of the moon.
I'm not saying, when I drink wine, they're not drinking wine!
It's hard to say what I'm going to say.
I'd like to know if you're going to be able to do it again or not.
I'm going to protest again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and again and
This is why I'm so excited to be coming to you for a snack.
Di bouki wou wit pou wen avatimakou
What I'm saying is that you can't do it.
Take three samples.
I'm going out to sing a song for you.
I can't wait to see what men can do.
It is possible to make a ploup in water in three hours.
The language is spoken by a lot of people.
I've had three daughters and three granddaughters.
I'm not sure if it's worth it.
I can't wait to see what you're up to.
I can't wait to see what you think of me.
I'm going to tell you about Le Kranse Wate a
Le Kranse Wate a yenn bouki annda Watè a
Li is also known as bouki
I washed and cleaned my clothes.
OK, but then again, when Michelan Mayes comes along, she's still a kid.
Teljan Exam K Ap Wa L Ba Nou Nou Nou and the Account
The book is about men who don't want to get married.
I'm going to be able to do this on my own.
This book is about men and women.
May di bouk di konma may di bouk di konma di konma may also refer to:
I'm not sure what I'm going to do when I become a mother.
I'm coming here now.
Bouki tant koum or sotye
Dwak mwen e cho
They don't take it any other way.
They're my mother.
They killed my mother.
I've been waiting for you to come here.
I'm going to tell you a secret.
To kill a mother, to want money, to kill a man, or to kill a mother, is there a way?
Mali is at the forefront.
It's hard to believe that you're not alone.
or behind the money.
I can't stop counting.
It's not a big deal.
The money is going to come in handy.
Now you're ready to move on.
Mai di Monchè was born.
Bouki went back to the house and took the alpon door or from the place to get out of the water.
Bouke is back at home.
It's not like there's a big door.
Now you're going to wear a bra.
I'm sure you'll be able to use it.
Serivan's wife was killed.
I'm going to tell you about it.
I'm with Bouki!
I don't know what to hold on to.
They are brothers and sisters.
There are two ways to do this.
He is my brother's brother.
I can't wait to see it.
and bouch wè manchè
I'm not sure what to expect.
I'm going to take care of my brother.
bravouman y ap brother m mal ap por la
I'm not going to say goodbye.
tayidou kem epòta m
There are two different epithets.
I can't hold on to it.
The value of a child's father is very high.
I'm not going to let my kids get away with it.
Okay, fine, thank you, ma'am, I'm going to tell you about some of the problems.
Oh, how I was a child!
I'm going to sit down and tell you what's going on.
I've had a lot of problems with my life and I've had a lot of problems with my life.
People are wondistans lò lò
Yo parle swayib
I'm going to put you in my shoes.
Yo pran admi m ap jounman member
How many people deserve to be treated?
That's how I got through it.
I am not a saint but I want to live a life of my own.
Menm tonme is responsible for this.
The Council of Life.
I'm going to release it.
rele yon geneparanm m
I'm going to be with my wife for a while.
Even the wine represents me and makes me feel good about myself.
I'm going to make a mistake.
I am the wine that represents me.
You are my representative and you are my prisoner.
If you are a king, you are a mademoiselle.
I'm the same person.
There is no such thing as a perfect match.
I'm going to tell you something.
I'm going to tell you about my husband.
I'm going to tell you who's coming.
Don't be fooled by the fact that you don't drink wine.
It's not like people don't want to do it.
Have you ever had a conversation with him?
My wife and I are married.
I've got a lot to say about my life here.
I've got a lot of problems.
It's even more difficult to get through the day.
The wife of one of the members is the same.
There's a lot more to life than that.
Men, even though they are clothed in cloth, even if they are not clothed in cloth, are not to be treated as such.
There is a new cycle of favours that has been passed down from generation to generation.
You're going to break a cow's mouth.
I sold the medium to other people to recoup some of the water.
My people have come from my country.
I'm not going to die.
I'm not the same person.
A cup of coffee.
I have the means to find a way.
When you have lost your replante bannann
This is a repike of coffee.
who is isay
I'm going to tell you a story.
I don't want to make you say a word.
The genesis of the process is simple.
Men of gold are now out of men.
I'm not sure if I'm going to make it to the top of the charm now.
san route tea under sion bravaj
I'm going to tell you a secret.
But I'm going to do a good job of getting them to do it or they're going to do it again.
My grandfather, who is now a German citizen, said that if he doesn't, I'm going to die.
M ekzalman k ap ral continue with black vile.òy papa m la petet or tank ta vin nou k ap fine pa ta vin tou
They've got a lot to say now.
I'm missing the whole thing, I'm missing the whole thing.
iswa m tag
I don't think so because I don't know if I'm a good woman or if I'm a bad person.
I'm sure you'll like the wine.
It's not like you're going to be able to do anything else.
I don't know where to go from here.
I've learned to count because when my dad doesn't take my money, he doesn't take my money.
My dad is trying to help me.
That's because you're the father.
Or lose your father-in-law and your son-in-law.
