Many hands [make] the load lighter.
A lot of small potatoes make a load.
After the dance, the drums are always heavy.
Before you laugh at those who limp, check the way you walk.
With patience, you will see an ant’s breast.
Haitians follow the flow.
Haiti is a sliding land (quicksand).
The beard is longer, but the Eyebrows are older.
The stick helps the foot.
[You] give a blow, [you] forget; [when you] leave marks, [they] remember.
Give little is not [being] cheap.
Bèf a ke pa janbe dife.
Bèf dèyè bwè pi bon dlo (si rete dlo).
Bèf pa di savann mèsi.
Bèf san ke, Bondye pouse mouch pou yo.
Bèl anfòm pa vle di lasante.
Bèl antèman pa vle di paradi.
Bèl cheve pa lajan.
Bèl dan pa vle di zanmi : dan pa kè.
Bo nan bouch, men pè dan.
Bondye bon.
Bondye pa bòpè.
Bonjou w se paspò ou.
Bouch granmoun santi, sa k ladan se rezon.
Bouch manje tout manje, men li pa pale tout pawòl.
Bourik fè pitit pou do l ka poze.
Bourik toujou aji bourik.
Bout kouto miyò pase zong.
Bwè dlo nan vè : respekte vè.
Byen mal pa lanmò.
Byen prese pa rive.(ou byen: Twò prese pa fe jou louvri)
Byen pre pa lakay.
Chaj ou pa ka pòte, ou mete-l atè dousman.
Chak chen pipi jan li konnen.
Chak kochon gen samdi pa-l.
(Pigs are usually slaughtered Saturdays)
Trade the boss, trade the job.
If the cat wants to sweat, you seek the dog on it.
The load that you bear on your head falls on your shoulders.
The road to need is never long.
The road of a pimple is the road to sores.
The money road has no thorns.
A long road does not kill people.
A dog has four legs, but it walks in only one path.
A starving dog does not lie down.
A dog with a bone in his mouth has no friends.
The dog that you took care of will bite you when enraged.
The dog steals tobacco even if it does not smoke.
The pot you did not put up, you do not put down.
A horse with ten masters will die [tied] to its post.
The horse knows the length of its rope.
Every bread has it’s cheese.
Rotten teeth only have power over (can only bite) ripe plantains.
The teeth laugh, beware.
Teeth are bones.
Two good cocks do not stay in the same farm-yard.
Two skinny people don’t fry. (Two poor people shouldn’t marry, for even together they won’t have enough to get by)
Two bulls do not stay in the same field.
To get by is not a sin.
Since Africa (Guinea), [negros] hate [negros] (We can never forgive those who sold us as slaves)
If you are in the slaughterhouse, you must accept to get blood on you.
Greet the devil, he’ll eat you. Don’t greet the devil, he’ll eat you.
The mouth makes debt, the behind pays back.
Water does not cross over holes. It must first fill the hole, before it can move on.
The doctor never treats himself.
The doctor takes care of you but he is not God.
Sleep is death’s little brother.
Twelve trades, thirteen miseries.
Your finger may smell, but you do not cut it and throw it away.
Behind mountains there are mountains.
Envite miyò pase mande padon.
En mangeant, l’appétit vient
Fanm pa dra.
Fanm se kajou: plis li vye, plis li bon.
Fè zanmi ak kouto avan zabriko mi.
Fèy mapou sanble fèy manyòk.
Fizi tire, nanpwen aranjman.
Fòk de klòch sonnen pou konn verite-a.
Fòk gen maladi pou gen lanmò.
Fòk ou bat tanbou-a pou tande son li.
Fòk ou pèdi tan pou ou gen tan.
Grangou se mizè, vant plen se traka.
Ipokrit se kouto de bò.
Jan chat mache, se pa konsa li kenbe rat.
Jan ou bat tanbou, se konsa nou danse.
Jan ou vini se jan an yo resevwa ou.
Je wè, bouch be.
Jijman Bondye vini sou bourik.
Joumou pa donnen kalbas.
Jwe ak makak, men pa manyen ke-l.
Kalbas gran bouch pa kenbe dlo.
Kat je kontre, manti kaba.
Kay piti, ou prann nat ou anba bra ou.
Kay koule tronpe soley men li pa tronpe lapli.
Kòfrefò pa swiv kòbiya.
Komansman chante se soufle.
Konmisyon pa chaj.
Kote fil fini, se la kouti fini.
Kote ki gen grangou, kabrit pa mouri nan kòd.
Kote ki gen granmoun, kay pa boule.
Kote ki gen kou pa gen chenn, kote ki gen chenn nanpwen kou.
Kote y’ap plimen kòdenn, poul pa ri.
Koulèv ki vle gwo rete nan trou-l.
Kouto pa janm grate manch li.
Krapo fè kòlè, li mouri san dèyè.
Labou rete kouran.
Lajan kase wòch.
Lamepriz vo mye ke larepons.
Lane pase toujou pi bon.
Lang pa lanmè, men li ka neye-w.
Lè kabrit gen twòp mèt, li mouri nan solèy.
Lè labouyi cho, ou manje-l a rebò.
Lè pyebwa jwe ak van, li pèdi fèy li.
Lè setan ou echi (lè ou fin’ fè tan ou), se ale p’ou ale.
Lè w’ap neye, ou kenbe branch ou jwenn.
Lè yon chodyè cho, ou pa desann li ak men.
Lespwa fè viv.
M’pat manje pwa, m’pa ka poupou pwa.
Machann nan mache gen de mezi.
Mache dousman, ou pòte bon nouvèl.
Madichon ou bay bèlmè ou se manman ou li rive.
Maladi pa konn vanyan.
Malè avèti pa touye kokobe.
Malè pa gen klaksonn.
Vye nèg pa vye chen.
Manje kwit pa gen mèt.
Mapou tonbe, kabrit manje fèy li.
Marengwen mòde-w sou nen, men ou pa ka ba-l kou fò.
Memwa se paswa.
Menm nan lanfè gen mounpa.
Mennen koulèv al lekòl pa anyen; se fè-l chita ki rèd.
Mèt do pa grate do.
Mezire avan ou koupe.
Mouch pa bezwen vyann, men li gate-l.
Moun ki bezwen deyò chache chemen pòt.
Moun mouri pa konnen valè dra blan.
Moun mouri pa pè santi.
Moun pa konn achte chat nan sak.
Moun pa-w se dra.
Move zèb ka leve toupatou.
Nan bay kout men, ou jwenn kout pye
Nan mitan diri, ti wòch goute grès.
Nan mitan avèg, bògn se rwa.
Nanpwen cho ki pa vin frèt..
Nanpwen metye ki pa nouri mèt li..
Nèg fè lide-l, Bondye ba-l dwa.
Nen pran kou, je kouri dlo; je pran kou, nen kouri dlo.
 Nou léd, nou la.
Ou bat tanbou epi ou danse ankò.
Ou granmoun sèlman lè ou lakay ou.
Ou konn kouri, men fòk ou konn kache.
Ou konn sa w’ap kite; ou pa konn sa ou pral jwenn.
Ou pa fouye zo nan kalalou.
Ou pa dwè dekouvri Sen Pòl pou kouvri Sen Piè.
Ou pa ka fè san sòti nan wòch.
Ougan pa janm geri maleng li.
Ouvriye vann zouti-l, men li pa vann metye-l.
Pa bay bèf la babokèt lè l’ap rale kabwèt.
Pa jete vye chodyè pou chodyè nèf.
Pa kroke makout twò wo, men kote men ou ka rive.
Pa pale sa ou pa we ak prop je ou.
Pa pèdi founo pou yon sèl pen.
Padon pa geri maleng.
Pale franse pa di lespri pou sa.
Parese pa gen kay.
Paròl gen zèl.
Parol pa chay.
Paròl two fò, machwè gonfle.
Pè pa preche de fwa.
Pitit ki pa kriye pa bezwen tete.
Pitit tig, se tig.
Pito ou mize ou nan wout, ou pote bon nouvèl.
Pòt tè pa goumen ak pòt fè.
Pousyè pa leve san van.
Premye so pa so.
Pye pa gen rasinn : tout moun ka tonbe.
Pye poul pi bon pase bwadann.
gro non tué ti chien
Clothes do not make a person.
Dirty clothes are [to be] washed in the family.
To give a hand leads to sorrow.
Lots of rats, the hole is not deep.
The rat knows, the cat knows: the corn barrel is safe.
Rats bite then blow.
[You may] hate the dog, but [you must] admit that its teeth are white.
Drinking again is [like] a wedding.
A fair deal does not spoil friendship.
[To be] responsible is a load.
What the eyes do not see does not make the heart grow fonder.
Out of Sight out of Mind.
What is still in my heart sleeps at my home.
What you do not know is bigger than you.
What you are searching underground, you find it on the ground.
What goes on in the kitchen, the house does not need to know.
An empty sack cannot stand up.
It is after the battle that you count the injured.
It is the cat of the house that will eat the hen of the house.
It’s two ‘good’ that makes candy.
It is the pork’s grease that cooks the pork.
Only the knife knows what is in the yam’s heart.
It is the kitchen that tells me how the house is.
It is when the snake dies that you can see its size.
It is when the wind blows that you can see the hen’s behind.
It is the owner of the body who watches his body.
It is on the road that you learn what goes on in [your] room.
It is on the white shirt that one can see the stain.
It is not the man who threw the stone who killed the snake: it is the man who saw it.
It is the syrup that attract ants.
It is on the mango tree full of fruits that they throw stones.
It is the shoe that knows if the sock has a hole.
If your boot is too tight, walk barefoot.
‘If I had known’ is always behind.
If you have a well that can give you water, you must not cut the tree near it.
If you cover a fire, you [still] have a fire.
If you eat a candle, you must poop the wick.
If you want to win over dirt, you need to bathe [thoroughly].
Stupid does not kill you, but it makes you sweat.
[You can] shake your head, [but] do not break your neck.
Time goes, [but] does not come back.
To hear and to see are two [different] things.
To hear does not mean to understand.
Breasts are never heavy for their owner.
The small stick you do not see is the one that may puncture your eye.
A puppy is strong only before his master’s house.
Light blows [again and again] bring death.
Little snakes need to grow in hiding.
For a little run, hold your breast; for a big run, don’t hold your breast.
Little ‘mapou’ [big tree highly respected in Haiti] do not grow at the foot of big ‘mapou’.
A little amount plus a little amount make a load.
The bull that lows is not fat.
Your anus is round… you [need to] fart square.
[There are] always leftovers at the tailor’s house.
Any strain animal [will] bite.
All people are people but not all people are the same.
Too much hurry makes you kiss the nose.
Too fast does not arrive.
A big belly does not mean pregnancy; a big head does not mean wits.
A thief never likes a thief like him.
Neighborhood is family.
See (live) today, but think about tomorrow.
See [it] or not, the funeral is at four o’clock.
The stone in the water does not know the pain of the stone in the sun.
Shame is heavier than a bag of salt.
You don’t buy a cat in a bag. (Make sure you know what you are buying.)
You don’t throw rocks at a green mango. (You wait until a mango is ripe before you try to knock it down from the tree.)
A good friend is better than a brother.
The hunter has his day, but the prey has his day as well
The goat’s business is not the sheep’s business.
Close friends are [like] a double-edge knife; far away friends are saved money.
[When] the necklace [is] broken in a bag, its pieces are not lost.
[When] eggs hatch too early, chickens will not live.