Men anpil, chay pa lou.
Anpil ti patat fè chay.
Aprè dans, tanbou toujou lou.
Avan ou ri moun bwete, gade jan ou mache.
Avek pasyans, w’ap wè tete foumi.
Ayisyen swiv kouran.
Ayiti se tè glise.
Bab pi long, men sousi pi vye.
Baton ede pye.
Bay kou, bliye; pote mak, sonje.
Bay piti pa chich.
Giving Small thing doesn’t mean stingy. (It’s just what you have)
An ox with a tail does not walk over the fire.
The ox that comes last drinks better water (if there is still water).
The ox does not thank the field.
The ox with no tail, God will clear the flies for it.
Pretty and in shape do not mean healthy.
A nice funeral does not mean access to paradise.
Nice hair is not money.
Beautiful smiles do not mean friends: smiles are not the heart.
Kiss the mouth, but fear the teeth.
God is good. (God willing)
God is not a father-in-law.
Your greeting is your passport.
Old folk’s breath may stink, what comes out though is wisdom.
The mouth eats all food, but does not talk all words.
The donkey has offspring so that its back may rest.
A donkey always acts like a donkey.
A piece of a knife is better than nails.
Drink water in a glass: respect the glass.
Not well is not death.
In a hurry will not arrive.
Being close to home is not the same as being home.
The load you cannot carry, you put it down carefully.
Every dog pisses his own way.
Each pig gets his own Saturday.
Chanje mèt, chanje metye.
Chat mande swe, ou mete chen deyè-l.
Chay sòti sou tèt, li tonbe sou zepòl.
Chemen bezwen pa janm long.
Chemen bouton se chemen maleng.
Chemen lajan pa gen pikan.
Chemen long pa touye moun.
Chen gen kat pye, men li ka mache nan yon sèl chimen.
Chen grangou pa kouche.
Chen ki gen zo nan bouch li pa gen zanmi.
Chen ou fè byen, lè li anraje, se ou li mòde.
Chen vòle tabak menm si li pa fimen.
Chodyè ou pa monte, ou pa desann li.
Chwal ki gen dis mèt mouri nan poto
Chwal konn longè kòd li.
Chak pain gen fromagge li
Dan pouri gen fòs sou bannann mi.
Dan griyen se danje.
Dan se zo.
De kòk kalite pa rete nan menm baskou.
De mèg pa fri.
De toro pa rete nan menm savann.
Degaje pa peche.
Depi nan Ginen, nèg rayi nèg.
Depi ou nan labatwa, fòk ou aksepte san vole sou ou.
Di djab bonjou, lap manje w. Pa di l bonjou, lap manje w.
Djòl fè dèt, dèyè peye.
Dlo pa janbe trou.
Doktè pa janm trete tèt li.
Doktè pran swen ou, men li pa Bondye.
Dòmi se ti frè lanmò.
Douz metye, trèz mizè.
Dwèt ou santi, men ou pa koupe-l jete.
Deye mòn gen mòn
Di merci, se lizay!
To avoid is better than to ask forgiveness.
Se lew goûté, wap konnen sil bon.
Women are not bed sheets.
A woman is like mahogany: the older she is, the better she is.
Make friend with the knife before apricots are ripe.
The ‘Mapou’ leaf looks like the manioc leaf.
[When] the guns fire, there is no [possible] agreement.
[You must hear] two bells ring to learn the truth.
There must be illness so as to have death.
You must beat the drum to hear its sound.
You need to lose time in order to have time.
Hunger is misery; a full stomach is worriness.
Hypocrites are two-edge knifes.
The way the cat walks is not the way it holds the rat.
The way you beat the drum is how we dance.
The way you come is the way people will receive you.
The eyes see, the mouth is silent.
God’s judgment comes on a donkey.
A pumpkin does not bear gourds.
[You may] play with the monkey, but don’t play with its tail.
A large pot without cover does not hold water.
face to face we meet, no lies. ( you can lie in from of me.
[When] the house is small, you hold your bedding under your arm.
A leaking roof may fool sunny weather, but cannot fool the rain.
The safe does not follow the hearse.
The first steps of singing are breath.
An errand is not a load.
Where the thread ends is where the seam ends.
Where there is hunger, goats do not die tied to their ropes.
Where there are elders, the house do not burn.
Where there are blows, there are no chains; where there are chains, there are no blows.
Where they pluck turkeys, chickens do not laugh.
The snake that wants to get big stays in its hole.
A knife never scrubs its own handle.
A toad gets angry, it dies without its buttock.
The mud stops the flow.
Money breaks rocks.
Contempt is better than an answer.
‘Last year’ is always better.
The tongue is not the sea, but it can drown you.
When a goat has too many masters (owners), it dies (tied) in the sun.
When the porridge is hot, you eat it on the side.
When the tree plays with the wind, it loses its leaves.
When your seven years are over (when your time is done), you [must] go for good.
When you are drowning, you hang to the branch you reach.
When a pot is hot, you do not take it down with your hands.
Hope makes one live.
I did not eat beans, I cannot poop beans.
The merchant at the market has two measures.
Walk slowly [when] you bear good news.
When you curse your stepmother, your mother will be the victim.
Illness does not know brave heart.
A foreseen disaster does not kill the fool.
Misfortune has no horn.
An old man is not an old dog.
Cooked food has no master.
When the ‘Mapou’ [huge tree] is down, the goats eat its leaves.
The mosquito bites you on the nose, but you cannot hit it hard.
Memory is a strainer.
Even in hell, there are people from your clan.
To take the snake to school is nothing; it is to make it sit that is tough.
You cannot scratch your own back.
Measure before you cut.
The fly does not need the meat, but it will spoil it.
He who must go out search for the door.
The dead does not know the value of white sheets.
The dead is not afraid to smell.
People don’t buy a cat in a bag.
Your clan is sheets.
Weeds can grow anywhere.
You give a hand, but [you may] get kicked out.
In the middle of [cooked] rice, a little pebble will taste grease.
Among the blind, the one-eyed is king.
There is nothing hot that will not get cold.
There is no craft that will not feed the craftsman.
The man gets the idea, God authorizes it.
The nose is hurt, the eyes water; the eyes are hurt, the nose runs.
We are ugly, but we are here.
You beat the drum and you dance again.
You are an old man only when you are at home.
You [may] know how to run, but you must know how to hide.
You [may] know what you leave behind; you do not know what you will get.
You do not dig up bones in akra.
You must not undress Saint Paul to dress Saint Peter.
You cannot have blood flow from a rock.
The ‘ougan’ (Medecine Man) never cures his own illness.
A carpenter [may] sell his tools, but he [cannot] sell his skills.
Do not put the harness on the ox when it is going to pull the kart.
Don’t throw away the old pot for a new pot.
Do not hang the basket too high, but where your hand can reach it.
Never talk about something that you have not seen with your own eyes.
Do not lose your oven over just one bread.
Forgiveness does not cure illness.
To speak French does not mean wits.
Lazy people do not have a house.
Words have wings.
Words are not a load.
Too false words [make] the jaw swell.
Fear does not preach twice.
The baby who does not cry does not need to be breast-fed.
A tiger cub is a tiger.
Better to take your time on the way, if you bring good news.
The clay pot [must] not wrestle with the iron pot.
Dust does not lift without wind.
The first fall is not a fall
Feet have no roots: everyone can fall.
A hen’s foot is better than a donkey’s hoof.
Rad pa janm fè moun.
Rad sal lave nan fanmi.
Rann sèvis mennen chagren.
Rat anpil, trou pa fon.
Rat konnen chat konnen barik mayi-a rete la.
 Rat mode, souffle
Rayi chen an, men di dan li blanch.
Rebwè se nòs.
Regle jis pa gate zanmi.
Responsab se chay.
Sa je pa wè, kè pa tounen.
What you don’t know can’t hurt you.
Sa ki rete nan kè-m dòmi lakay.
Sa ou pa konnen pi gran pase ou.
Sa ou t’ap chache antè, ou jwenn li atè.
Sa-k pase nan kizin, lakay pa bezwen konnen.
Sak vid pa kanpe.
Se aprè batay nou konte blese.
Se chat kay k’ap manje poul kay.
Se de bon ki fè bonbon.
Se grès kochon an ki kwit kochon an.
Se kouto sèlman ki konnen sa ki nan kè yanm.
Se lakizin ki di-m ki jan lakay ye.
Se lè koulèv mouri ou wè longè-l.
Sè lè van soufle ou wè dèyè poul.
Se mèt kò ki veye kò.
Se nan chemen ou konnen sa-k pase nan chanm.
Se nan chemiz blanch yo wè tach
Se pa nèg ki voye wòch ki te tiye koulèv-la, se nèg ki te wè’l
Se siro ki rale foumi.
Se sou pye mango chaje yo voye wòch.
Se soulye ki konn si chosèt gen twou.
Si bòt la tro jis pou ou, mache pye atè.
Si m’te konnen toujou dèyè.
Si ou gen yon sous k’ap ba ou dlo, ou pa koupe pyebwa kote-l.
Si ou kouvri dife, w’ap gen dife.
Si ou manje bouji, fòk ou poupou mèch.
Si ou vle gen rezon devan kras, se benyen p’ou benyen.
Sòt pa touye-w, men li fè ou swe.
Souke tèt pa kase kou.
Tan ale, li pa tounen.
Tande ak wè se de.
Tande pa di konprann pou sa.
Tete pa janm twò lou pou mèt li.
Ti bwa ou pa wè, se li ka pete je-w.
Ti chen gen fòs sèlman devan kay mèt li.
Ti kou ti kou bay lanmò.
Ti koulèv k’ap grandi se anba wòch ke li rete.
Ti kouri kenbe tete; gwo kouri, lage tete.
Ti mapou pa grandi anba gwo mapou.
Ti pil ti pil fè chaj.
Toro ki begle pa gra.
Twou bounda’w won… ou bizwen pete kare.
Toujou gen retay kay tayè.
Tout bèt jennen mòde.
Tout moun se moun, tout moun pa menm.
Two prese fè ou bo sou nen.
Two vit pa rive.
Vant plen pa gwòs; gwo tèt pa lespri.
Volè pa janm renmen volè parey li.
Vwazinaj se fanmi
Wè jodi-a, men sonje denmen.
Wè pa wè, lantèman pou katrè.
Wòch nan dlo pa konn doulè wòch nan soley.
Wont pi lou pase sak sèl.
Yo pa achte chat nan sak.
Yo pa voye wòch sou mango vèt.
Yon bon zanmi pi bon pase frè.
Yon jou pou chasè, yon jou pou jibye
Zafè kabrit pa zafè mouton.
Zanmi prè se kouto de bo; zanmi lwen se lajan sere.
Zanno kase nan sak, grenn li pa pèdi.
Ze ki kale tro bonè, ti poul la p’ap viv.