Treachery
Out of treachery, they kidnapped and hanged Anacaona.
Out of treachery, they kidnapped Toussaint Louverture and took him to prison in France.
Out of treachery, they shot this hero, Charlemagne Péralte.
In the year 1503 Nikola Ovando with the spaniards stood in the city of Ench located in central plato.
« Hinche » has the oldest catholic cathedral, the church of Emmeculate Conception, which is one of the oldest church in the americas.
The construction of the church started in 1503 and ended in 1508.
In the year 1784, tousen louveti entered the city of « Hinche » in the territory of Sendomeng.
Today « Hinche » is the principal city in the Central Plato.
It is in the city of « Hinche » that the governor remi Masena Peralte which was also a general used to live with his wife Marie Claire Emmanuel.
They got married on September 28, 1884.
They had two kids
Veronique and Francios Borgia Peralte.
Francios was born on octiber 10, 1885 in « Hinche ».
He got baptized on october 18, 1885 in the church of « Hinche ».




Charlemagne was a very religious person.
He once was an altar boy.
He learn catechisme with Father Porco.
Father Porco was his mentor he was there to help with his adult life and was also his spiritual guide.
Porco referred to Charlemagne
He was a good kid and always ready to protect his pride.
Charlemagne did some of his studies in « Hinche ».
He later moved to Port-au-prince to finish his studies at the school of Saint-Louis de Gonzague.
After the death of the father he quit school.
He was 19 years old.
he quit school due to the death of his father.
In February of 1904 he quit school due to the death of his father.
he returned to « Hinche » to manage the wealth of the family and also of the land that the mother had bought him.

Charlemagne was a Handsome man of the society of « Hinche » always well groomed and clothed.
He always wore a Panama Hat, females were always attracted to him.
Horse rides,
chicken fights,
wood hunts 
and dance were what the young Charlemagne
which one day become the mayor of « Hinche » used to do to entertaine himself.
Then he will later become a judge in the city of « Mirebalais ».
He would also hold the position of Vice-consul of Haiti in Elias Piñas 
He would embrace the army which will send him to the North- West as Commander of the Army.
In His political life,
he once was partner of Cincinnatus Leconte,
he once was partner of Tancrede Augustre 
il supporte his brother in Law Oreste Zamor which had married his sister Veronique.
The president Oreste Zamor is a Natif of « Hinche ».
The invasion of the ameican armed forces in 1915 found Charlemagne as army commander of Leogane.
The population of Leogane loved him alot.
July 1st 1915, an american boat « The Washington » with its captain Admiral Capenton arrive in Cap-Haitian water.
On july 27th he sailed to Port-au-Prince.
On july 28th he used a crew of 162 marines to occupy the capital.
They did not encounter no resistance 
only Pierre sully fired his gun
getting killed.
The pride of Haitians was at its lowest on that day.
On august 17 1915 after the soldiers of Sully escaped the honnor, Charlemagne also for his honor refused to bare arms.

They said «NO» 
the commander of the american war boat the « Eagle » 
an another commander who came with his troops by train.
Therefore Charlemagne refuse to surrender the city to the americans without the express order of the president Sudre Dartiguenave which was newly installed on august 12 by the americans.
Always for his honor he forced the american soldiers to built thier tents on a public park.
The president Dartiguenave an american puppet put an end to Charlemagne job as commander of the army.
Charle­magne then left Leogane 
He did a quick stay at Port-Au-Prince, before gaining his home­ town
he had a stable by managing his business during two years.
During the night of october 11th 1917, about sixty armed man invaded and attacked the house of the american chief of army in « Hinche ».
Charlemagne Peralte and his half brother Saul Pralte are accused of being partners with rebels. 
They got arrested.
The americans ordered Charlemagne House to be burned down and Saul house got burglarized.
Saul also got assasinated near the Canary river by americans.

When it comes to Charlemagne, after the first judgement at « Hinche ».
They brought him to Ouanaminthe and got sentenced to 5 years of forced labor for his one crime,
the crime of not accepting the americans invader.
From Ounaminthe Charlemagne got transfered to a jail in Cap.
We saw him with the head shaved and prison clothes.
He preached in the prison chapel where his mother assited regularly.
In the morning of September 3, 1918 Charlemagne escaped from prison.

He was welcomed at the house of 2 good friends.
Gabrielle Sewonville one of his good friends dressed Charlemagne
as a girl and help him disapear in the Dominican Republic.
In October 1918 Charlemagne on a Horse arrived at « Pignon » where
he invited 200 prisoners to follow him in the mountains.
To prepare to fight the Americans.
That day of war of Charlemagne Peralte took effect.
It is a civil war because Charlmagne Peralte’s army should fight not only against the Americans but also fight against the Haitian Army.
It was a painful war which accounted for 2000 deaths of Charlemagne side.
soldiers were brave and courageous.
They were badly dressed
and equipped with machete,old guns 
and walked bare footed.

In front of them 
Haitian soldiers 
Americans soldiers
soldiers were trained
well equipped 
machine guns,
radio 
and were soon going to have planes and bombs.
Charlemagne warriors were called Cacos, they were very offensive , they attacked then they would dissapear in the woods.
They would ambush the americans and espace thru the mountains.
They became more dangerous when they get joined but Benoit Batraville and his numerous companions.
Charlemagne and Benoit later started the revolutionary government of the North.
The worst was on October 7, 1919 Charlemagne Peralte and Benoit Batraville started with 300 men an attack on Port-au-Prince.
They had 40 deaths and they withdrew.
The Americans understood all the danger of the rebels force.
That day, they swore that the death of Peralte was to happen as soon as possible.
- Péralte must die!
- Yes, sir!
sergeant Hermann H.
Hanneken a sergeant in the army recieved as mission to end the life of Charlemagne.
He talked to a traitor named Jean Baptiste Konze, whom for money would do anything.
Hermann gave him some advantages and also for jealousy he accepted to betray Peralte.
Guided by Konze all the way to Charlemagne camp, 
Hermann heavy armed put two bullets in Peralte heart before he had the time to react.
Charlemagne died on the spot between the night of octiber 31st and november 1st, 1919.
The body of Charlemagne got attached to a door, next to him the Haitian flag and a crucifix.
Hanneken wanted to demoralise the Haitian people.
Instead Charlemagne was seen as an Hero in the heart of the majority of all Haitians.
Burried in a secret place at « Chabert » clost to the » Trou du Nord ».
His remaines were found at the end of the occupation in 1939, 20 years after his death.
The remains that were identified by his mother were buried at the cimitery of « Cap-Haitian » after a ceremony on november 26, 1934 in presence of the president Vincent with his government.
Ayibobo, ayabombe for this valorous compatriot and National Hero.
We will never stop paying hommage to Charlemagne Peralte.
Generation after Generation it is model that the young and the old ones have to respect and admire for a new Haiti.
