Here are women
Strong women from here and elsewhere,
Courageous women of today, And courageous women of yesterday,
Those who make history, And who mark her;
Those who bring Changes to our world.
So here are some acceptable women To serve as role models for our young people.
Mimoz
Mimoz Is a petite woman,
A beautiful little girl
A small flower Mimoz,
She is thin, she is fat
She is black, she is dark,
light or brown.
So many nuances, What a beauty
A petite woman,
A beautiful little girl
Frizzy hair,
supple hair
Short hair, 
long hair,
So many types of hair, She is marvellous
This little woman
Is all these little girls
Little daughters of God,
Creature of God
The color of God

It's beautiful, It's so beautiful.
ANACAONA
She is the first woman mentioned in the histo­ry of Haiti.
She was a particularly beautiful Indian woman, queen among beauty queens.
She was the sister of Bohéchio, the Cacique of Xaragwa, kasika located in the south-east of Haiti.
Bohé­chio lead his caciquat with the help of his sister.
Anacaona married Cacique Caonabo who ruled the Maguana, in the central region of the island.
It must be remembered that Anacaona loved the life of an artist very much.
She loved to sing, she loved to dance, and she encouraged all her subjects to follow her.
She devoted herself to poetry and singing.
She organized beautiful lite­rary festivals, where songs and dances followed one another.
In Léogâne (Yagwana), capital of the caciquat, a special place was reserved for the arey­tos.
In 1492, when the Spaniards landed in Haiti,
Anacaona played many roles:
priestess of Indian cults with the Zem divini­ties;
musician and the greatest poet on the whole island;
wife of cacique Caonabo;
sister of Cacique Bohéchio;
Cacique assistant to Xaragua.
Anacaona strove to organize special parties in honor of the Spaniards.
No doubt, she was impa­tient to find a wonderful collaboration on the part of these strangers.
However she was only met with disappointments. The white men were de­ceitful.
They played and cheated on her.
So one evening, when the Indians and Spaniards decided to host a beautiful party under a starry sky, 
these white men took her prisoner after they kidnap her daughter Gwenamota.
Henriette Saint-Marc
A beautiful woman, well-educated, with an impeccable reputation ,
Henriette decided to  set aside these fine qualities.
She threw her body and soul into the struggle for our liberation, to help create a free and independent country.
She took it upon herself to woo the French sol­diers in order to steal ammunition that the native army badly needed.
Other courageous Haitians also played this game.
However, it was necessa­ry to act with caution, with skill, to avoid being caught.
Unfortunately, despite all the precautions she took, Henriette was discovered.
In December 1802, in the district of Depre, Da­vid Troy, a secret agent of the French army, beat Henriette at her own game.  He claimed to be in love with her. In the end, he had her handcuffed.
He had her dragged in front of the cathedral of Port-au-Prince to be hanged there.
Nonetheless, before her death, Henriette found the strength to utter courageous words that set fire within the hearts of the native soldiers. With her words, she encouraged them to conti­nue the struggle.
Henriette's last cry was akin to a powerful rhum that would warm the souls of all the rebellious slaves and freedmen that had joi­ned in revolution.
Henriette's sacrifice was not in vain.
Many wanted to avenge her death.
Less than a year la­ter, the native army crushed Napoleon’s army, libe­rating Haiti.
From the sound of the queen conch, the second independent republic in all of America was born.
Sanite Belair
Sanite Belair, the wife of Charles Belair, prepa­red the battle plans and participated in the deci­sions for the fight against the French soldiers.
She was often with her husband.
They were arrested together.
The French soldiers tortured them wit­hout mercy.
However, Sanite was a courageous woman in the face of the white torturers who kil­led her.
Wanted for decapitation as it was done for thieves and other criminals, she fought with the French soldiers, who in turn had to shoot her.
Madame Pajo 
In Petite Rivière de l'Artibonite, Madame Pajo was a servant at Abbé Vido.
She used to spy on French soldiers.
So one day, while Dessalines was visiting Abbé Vido, Madame Pajo learned that Des­ salines had to be arrested.
Then, rushing forward, she ran towards the general-in-chief and signed to him to flee.
Victoria Montou Victoria Montou had a nickname “Toya“.
She was a slave on the Decao dwelling, where she and her nephew Dessalines had endured a lot of suffe­ ring in hard work, because of their rebellious na­ ture.
Because they seemed like they were always plotting, they were separated.
Toya was sent to settler Delije's dwelling .
She was in charge of a group of slaves.
She encouraged them to revolt.
They armed themselves with sticks to protest.
But they were unlucky.
They were captured.
Toya was arrested.
She had to confess her links with other rebel slave groups under the leadership of Dessa­ lines.
Madame Marie-Jeanne Lamartinière was an extremely popular slave in the native army which fought for independence.
She stood out at the Crête à Pierrot, where all those who were discou­ raged, seeing her and hearing her fiery words be­ came more seasoned and fuller of ardor.
The soldiers saw her as this ember which warms their hearts and their blood with its flames.
They believed in Marie-Jeanne, as in a blessed woman, as in a carrier of luck.
Marie-Jeanne was, for them, like an amulet!
Descourtilz, a writer and doctor who was in the fort, said:
"This voice made the soldiers stronger; it kindled their souls like a fire which made them more determined." 
Another writer, Panfil De Lacroix, declared:
"Despite the cannonballs which fell in the fort, and the difficult life, Marie-Jeanne stood in all her splendor, her rifle in her hand. Encouraged, she set the example, she responded to the enemy with her shots.
If Lamartinière, wick in hand, reta­liated with her cannon balls sent on the assaulting enemy;
Marie-Jeanne, she fanaticized the native army by shouting: 
“it is better to perish buried in the rubble of a fort than being in the hand of our enemies”.
Catherine Flon According to the majority of researchers, here is what really happened: From May 14 to 18, 1803, the ingenious army leaders who were struggling to get out of slavery gathered in Arcahaie to prepare the battle plan for the days to come.
This meeting was called The Arcahaie Congress.
During this same congress, on May 18, Catherine Flon sewed the blue-red flag.
It was under this flag that the Negro army fought until independence.
At that time, it represented the union of blacks and mulattoes.
Catherine Flon, a woman of history As we have noticed, Catherine Flon has always been associated with the creation of the flag.
Then, according to what is reported, she did so on May 18 during the Arcahaie Congress.
So, whether in Petite Rivière de l'Artibonite, whether in Arcahaie, the name of Catherine Flon is part of history as a woman who participated in the foundation of the new country.
Grann Giton May 18, 1803, in a small town near the village of Arcahaie, called Merotte, General Jean Jacques Dessalines and other chiefs who accompanied him, reated the national flag during a congress.
The reason the flag was created in Merotte is be­ cause in this place Dessalines had a wife named Grann Giton.
It was with in this woman’s house that the decision to create a flag was made.
At that time, there was no seamstress in Merotte, 
so the general sent two pieces of fabric to Catherine Flon, so that she could sew the flag. Catherine Flon lived in Portail Courjolle.
Today, if you visit Grann Giton yard , you will find a newly rebuilt house.
Ertha Pascal was born in Pétionville on August 13.
She was the penultimate of a family of ten children.
People who knew her said that Ertha was a calm and quiet teenager who liked soli­ tude.
Although her father died when she was only three years old, she dreamed and still hoped to find him.
She was passionate about reading.
She loved the children in her neighborhood and used to play with them, either hopscotch, osselets, car­ dinal points, or jump rope.
She also loved music and poetry.
She loved to recite Haitian poems as well as French poems.
She had an extraordinary memory.
Ertha used to help her mother with the housework, but that didn't stop her from maintaining her good grades in high school and col­ lege.
Ertha attended the Pétion­ ville primary school, first at the Sister Anne-Marie Javoueh school and then at the Republic of Chile school.
She started her secondary school at Fernand Prosper College.
She completed it at Roger An­ glade College.
After that, she studied law in Go­ naïves in 1971, where she completed her thesis, which was successfully presented before a com­mittee.
She became the first female lawyer mem­ ber of the Port-au-Prince bar, the first woman judge in Haiti, the first female at the Court of Cas­ sation, the first female president of Haiti.
In 1973, Ertha married Ernst Trouillot, a great lawyer, writer, journalist, and a daughter was born through this union.
In 1972, Ertha Pascal Trouillot and her hus­ band published the" Codes de Lois usuelles," an important piece of legal work that most lawyers referred to in our Haitians' court system.
In 1990, she published another book, Volume II, "Usual Law Codes." By the time she became President of Haiti on March 13, 1990, she had published four books.
On February 7, 1991, she transferred the President's power to Jean Bertrand Aristide with a lot of dignity.
General Hérard Abraham gave the investiture to Ertha Pascal;
21 cannon shots and drum rolls came to greet President Ertha, who would lead a volatile country.
It was not easy, but Ertha succee­ded in having honest elections, democratic, cre­ dible values that Haiti did not have long ago.
Former President Ertha Pascal now lives at her residential home, writing books, presenting lec­ tures, and advising her sisters and brothers to live their faith.
We want to close with this judicious advice offered to us by President Ertha Pascale Trouillot.
She reminds us that the road is difficult and the mountain high.
The fragrant flowers that grow at the top will never belong to those discouraged and shelter from the wind at the bottom of the mountain.
Michaëlle Jean 
Michaëlle Jean was born in Port-au-Prince in 1957.
She left Haiti at the age of 11 in 1968 accom­panied by her mother and two sisters to reunite with his father, who fled the Francois Duvalier' regime.
His father, a philosophy professor in Port-au-Prince, was tortured by Papa Doc.
The family first settled in Thetford, a province of Quebec, and then moved to Montreal, where most Haitian in­ tellectuals lived at that time.
Leaving Haiti was a "great wound" for Mi­chaëlle, who decided to use this painful expe­rience as a lever to move forward.
After an under­ graduate degree:
Bachelor's degree in Spanish and Italian, she attended the University of Mon­ treal, where she completed a master's degree in comparative literature.
Later she specialized in Italian language and culture:
University of Perugia (1982), University of Florence (1984), University of Milan (1985).
So on her return to Canada, she be­ came able to teach at the University of Montreal. But, she changed her mind;
she left teaching for journalism.
She joined Radio-Canada television.
She appeared on several shows and won a spe­ cial place in the hearts of all Canadians.
She has participated in the making of several films in col­ laboration with her husband, Daniel Lafond.
She has also participated in several programs in Haiti.
On the occasion of the report on the elections of 1987, she almost lost her life under the bandits' bullets in Port-au-Prince.
Because she could not have children, she came to Haiti to adopt a daughter:
Marie Eden, who is now about ten years old.
Michaëlle is multilingual.
She speaks and writes 5 languages:
Creole, French, English, Spanish, Ita­ lian.
She understands Portuguese.
As a volunteer, she loved to give of her time to help women and children in need.
She has received more than 10 decorations and honors.
On Thursday, August 4, 2005, it was a thun­ derclap in Canada.
Canadian Prime Minister Paul Martin announces the appointment of Michaëlle Jean as Governor-General of Canada.
It is a great responsibility and a great honor for Michaëlle.
It was also pride and honor for Haiti to have one of her children occupy this prestigious position, the most important in Canada.
Because the position of Governor-General consists of:
- represent the Queen of England in Canada, with the title of Commander-in-Chief of the Cana­ dian Army;
- visit and present decorations to Canadian mi­ litary personnel abroad;
- promote unity in Canada, which has 10 pro­ vinces and three territories;
- teach Canadians to be proud of their country, Canada;
teach them how to work to build a strong and generous community;
- dissolve parliament or ask the opposition lea­ der to form a new government if necessary;
- preside over the swearing-in ceremony of the Prime Minister, the President of the Supreme Court, the Council of Ministers;
- receive credentials from ambassadors repre­ senting their country in Canada;
Governor Michaëlle will have 2 official resi­ dences:
a palace in the middle of a 32-acre park with 10,000 trees in the federal capital Ottawa, in the province of Ontario,
and another palace in Quebec, capital of the province of Quebec:
the Château La Citadelle on the Plains of Abraham.
The flag of the Governor-General, in this case, Michaëlle Jean, occupies the first place in front of the Canadian flag.
The Governor will have 170 people under him to provide him with all the ser­ vices he needs for his work.
In addition to her per­ sonal salary, she has a $ 19 million budget for her governor.
After his tenure as Governor-General of Cana­ da, Michael Jean held the following positions:
• Special Envoy for UNESCO in HAITI (October 1, 2010);
• Chairman of the board of directors of the Ins­ titut québécois de irrigation at Laval University (October 2010);
• Chancellor of the University of OTTAWA (No­ vember 7, 2011);
• Witness of the International Organization of la Francophonie at the Olympic Games in the En­ glish capital, London (April 2011);
• Secretary-General of the OIF (International Organization of La Francophonie) (November 20, 2014).
Well done, Michaëlle!
Hold on.
And, always forward.
HOLD ON!
Marie Michelle tells us how she lost her legs:
"I was at the house with Leyanda, my three year old niece.
When the house shook, during the earth­ quake, all the walls collapsed.
I ran towards Leyan­ da.
I was protecting her with my body.
The rubble had almost buried me.
I couldn't move.
I felt a lot of pain.
And Leyanda was very afraid.
I hugged her very tightly and kept talking to her, to give her confidence.
We stayed like that all night.
Leyanda emerged from the rubble unharmed.
But Marie Michelle’s right leg was in bad shape.
When we met her, she was in great pain.
But, she had stood up to comfort other wounded and their families.
“Yes, I'm sad, but I found all my fa­ mily.
I saved my little niece.
And I have life in front of me.
I want to have a prosthetic leg to go back to school and one day become a flight attendant ”.
Hermit is a small "restavèk".
It has been four years since her mother placed her in domestic ser­ vice so that she could have a better life.
But, what better life?
Everyday she collects beatings, does many chores, and is pained by hunger.
Since the earthquake, life has become even more difficult for her.
If she sleeps outside, if food is scarce, she still has to go digging under the rubble.
"Every day I have to go to the ruined house to collect whatever I can find.
It's very dangerous.
I'm afraid.
But I have to go.
" * * * Starling is 8 years old.
With her parents, she found refuge in the courtyard of the Prime Minis­ ter.
There she plays with her new friends.
She plays, so she can forget for a moment the hard life she has led since the earthquake.
“That day I was doing my homework on the balcony at home.
My father was at work.
My mother had gone shop­ ping ...
Rocks and rubble reopened my notebook and my book.
I was there, dazed ...
Finally, I un­ derstood ...
the house had collapsed and I found myself in the middle of the rubble.
In the garden of the Prime Minister, there is a large refugee camp.
A camp which will probably stand for some time, until the refugees are able to leave.
Next to the bougainvilleas, under the flam­ boyant trees, we have carefully lined up tents, tarpaulins and arbors.
Stéphanie, a 25-year-old Haitian scout leader, explains:
“When we arrived on Wednesday January 13, there were more than four thousand people, one on top of the other.
It was a mess.
Junior, my brother, also a scout leader, and I got our hands dirty, we called on everyone to work to improve the situation.
The priority was:
order, discipline, organization of aid, solidarity between all the refugees.
At 10 p.m there is cur­ few.
The rescue team inspected the camp around the clock.
We had succeeded in setting up teams to plan the distribution of aid, water and food.
We had also succeeded in setting up a clinic ”.
Sté­ phanie and her brother Junior played the role of mayor in this new city.
Marie Thérèse does not care about death.
She is a midwife who strives to give life.
In this earth­ quake, she lost 4 of her 8 children, but she tied her waist to help pregnant women.
Canapé Vert!
Look at these women!
They are the hope of the country.
There are twenty women:
boots, helmets, shovels, pickaxes, wheelbarrows ...
They were there, they cleared the rubble.
Yes, they want to work.
They want to move forward to forget their pain, to tame their grief.
Fabienne is one of them:
yellow helmet on her head, a smile and her beautiful white teeth ...
And, as if by magic, she transmits her courage to all the others. A strong and hard-working woman!
But when you take a closer look, Fabienne is 28 years old and has just lost her husband in the disaster.
“My husband was at home.
I was at the market.
He died under the rubble.
His body and the de­ bris were collected in a mechanical excavator to be deposited in a false commune.
It saddens me very much not to have been able to bury him with dignity.
Malala Yousafzai
On October 9, 2012, to punish her for defen­ ding the right of women to attend school, the Ta­ liban attacked Malala, shooting her in the head.
Severely injured, she was on the verge of death.
On October 15, 2012, a special plane flew Malala to the United Kingdom.
She was treated at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital, a hospital specia­ lized in the care of war wounded soldiers.
On January 3, 2013, Malala left Queen Eliza­ beth Hospital for home care.
On February 2, 2013, Malala returned to the hospital for another head operation, an operation that lasted nearly five hours.
Doctors said it could take another 18 months of treatment before much of the damage to Malala's head could be repaired.
However, on the same day, Malala gave us a wonderful message that we should keep in our hearts forever.
"And because of these prayers God has given me this new life ...
and this is a second life.
And I want to serve.
I want to serve the people.
I want every girl, every child, to be educated".
In 2014, Malala Yousafzai, along with Kailash Satyrthi, won the Nobel Peace Prize.
She was only 17 years old.
Naomi was born in Osaka, a city in Japan.
She was born on October 18, 1997.
Naomi is her first name, 
and Osaka her last­ name the same name as the city where she was born.
Her first name "Naomi"
it's looks like an Haitian first name,
It is because Naomi's father is from the city of Jacmel, Haiti, his name is Léo­nard François.
Naomi's mother is Japanese.
When Naomi was three years old, her parents moved to New York City,
they lived in Long Island.
Naomi went to Elmont Alden Terace Elementary School.
Naomi speaks perfect English.
But, Naomi understands Japanese even though she doesn't speak it fluently, 
she also understands Creole well, as her grandmother, her father's mother, lived with the family.
When I say the family, I mean the father, that we already know by his name and first name, 
it's also the mother whose name is Ta­maki Osaka, and that's in addition Naomi and her older sister, Mari Osaka.
The family had 4 mem­ bers when she lived in Japan.
But on arrival in the United States, the grandmother came to expand the family.
A grandmother who cooked very well.
They say, Naomi loves our Creole cuisine.
And the grandmother also spoke Creole with these 2 little girls.
They ate Creole, they spoke Creole:
Naomi is therefore an authentic Haitian.
She loves Haiti.
She says it's such a welcoming and different land.
Let's take this story to heart.
Naomi is a role model for us, children and adults of Haiti.
She is a champion.
She is a tennis star.
She has won many championships, many trophies.
Ayabonbe!
She is proud of her Haitian origins.
on August 26, 2020 she refused to play the semi final of Au­ gust 27, 2020, to protest against white American police officers abusing, oppressing and killing black Americans.
Well done Naomi!
On October 16, 2020, Naomi celebrated her 23rd birthday.
This is the first time in the history of international tennis that we find such a young woman champion only in her twenties.
Mari, Naomi's older sister also plays tennis.
It was their father who taught them the start of the sport.

Mari and Naomi have participated in com­ petitions twice.
Mari won the first tennis tourna­ment.
But Naomi got her revenge, she beat her older sister in the second meeting.
Mari and Naomi love each other, respect each other, appreciate each other.
They find themselves in a united family, a good example to follow.
U-20 Historically, too, this is the first time that a Ca­ ribbean women's team, in this case Haiti, has qua­ lified for the Fifa World Cup in the under-20 cate­ gory.
The Concacaf zone is still dominated by the women's teams from North America, mainly that of the United States of America, which had never drawn or lost a match (in several confrontations) in the regional semi-final, qualifying for the world cup.
But, the U-20 players of Haiti gave them a great resistance on Friday January 26, 2018.
U-20 What a beautiful story U-20, what a great story.
Your story, it fills all Haitians with joy.
It’s a story that this time around the world will leave a positive image in favor of Haiti.
What pride for us Haitians to see the victory of our Under-20 team in Montreal where they knoc­ ked out the Canadians!
Ladies, be proud of your culture!
Be proud of your flag!
Be proud of your lan­ guage, 
be proud of your success.
And I encourage you to move forward.
"Grenadye alaso"!
Without resting, carry our flag high, go to vic­tory!
Play and win for Haiti and for yourselves!
