Dear Readers,
This collection of Letters from Ife and Soul constitutes a novel experiment in Haitian Creole Literature.
This epistolary undertaking is a follow-up to an idea submitted to fellow writers who share the same ideology with respect to works in Creole. In 1992, I had suggested that this genre be given a place amongst other works in Haitian Creole Literature.
In this collection, you will discover a part of my life, the sense of freedom afforded to my vision of the imaginary, as well as a certain mystique about the love between Ife and Soul.
In the dynamic of that mutual feeling as it was dreamed, willed and accepted, lives a determination that opens on a vista of social commitnent. 
Furthermore, at the very source of that imaginary work, the universal love that I nurture for all those who fight for social justice unfolds in its fullness.
Upon reading these letters, you can easily discover
how poetry, poetical philosophy, hope, and love converge to awaken your sense of pleasure and your passions prose,
and bring forth a new dimension to our beautiful Creole tongue which is gaining in stature in contemporary Haitian literature.
Dear friends! Happy reading.
Two stars weaving: A love nest
My dear Soul,
This moming I am asking you to hold my hand.
If you hold on tighty, together we will retrace the paths that brought strength to our bodies and to our souls.
The path I retrace in your memory tonight is the one that runs through the back roads of Morne IHôpital,
through Lamontay where we walked, sometimes side by side, sometimes one behind the other, discovering the gentle sway of the shadows under the leafy dome bejewelled with crystalline dew.
Bounding down the steep rocky path, we discovered that little nest we called our own,
a little cove of greenery where nature did not have to dress up to us with her perfume.
It was not too close to the city nor was it too far away from it.
We were in our Own place where.
upon our arrival, the birds and the morning breeze welcomed us, singing in harmony.
The pilgrims songs had the same effect on our ears.
It was in the midst of that ambiance that we discovered that large oval boulder.
It was ours,
we took possession with the sheer strength of our love.
If you remember, it was on that stone that we let our eyes speak what our lips could not express. Here we dreamt about our achievemens, our unfulfilled dreams, our unreachable dreams.
Do you remember those saplings that seemed to want to enlace the big cisalpina tree in a tender embrace?
They always welcomed us with a respectful bow each season under the freshness of their boughs.
The last time we went that way we weren't alone.
Do you remember William and his camera?
Do you remember the mist like a muslin coverlet cascading under a bedspread laid by the splendour of May?
Morne lHopital was coyly saying a final goodbye with tears in her eyes.
Yes! That's how it happened every two veeks under the verdant cushion of the mombins, the sirouels and the kenep trees hats the way the sun continued to shine for the lovers who took refuge in the underbelly of Morne l'Hôpital.
Two stars weaving
A love nest
Made soft by fluffy clouds
The rainbow, the willing accomplice
Celebrating our newborn love
Tell me Do you remember?

Tonight, neither of us is lurking at the foot of Morne I’Hopital.
We turn our back on it a long time ago and
we are now breathing its fresh air from the other side of the ocean.
Meanwhile, all the trees that used to tease our bodies with the coolness of their shade have disappeared, their metamorphised into charcoal, houses and furniture completed, consummated. If you see Morne l'Hôpital today you will not be to find appropriate words to express such an ecological disaster.
Adieu
My heart is so sad.
I still dream about it.
Hugs and kisses.
Like fireworks in my heart
Dear Soul,
This evening l am home alone letting the soft breezes caress my skin, while the azure of the cloudless sky defines the contour of my window.
Complete silence. The rustling motion of an unseen intruder interrupts my thoughts. It's with this friendly presence I celebrate the happy arrival of the twins.
Nine months and there was twin number one and immediately after, twin number two. They were brought in to renew the acquaintance of their mother.
Inside my being
Flowing through my veins
My love for them explodes
Like fireworks in my heart
At that late hour I was not present. I could neither share the deep emotion or live that marvelous moment with you.
In my heart and in my spirit, my powerful love brought me next to you. I could attenuate every slice of sudden pain, every vibration that squeezed your womb and that were tied to your moment of happy deliverance.
I said happy for when you were attached to those stirrups, you could not know or guess what kind of children, normal or deformed, that were going to be introduced to you.
Science can detect the most subtle sounds of the human body.
However, it could not fathom your surprise together with your joy when you found yourself face to face with your twins still warm from your womb.
There lies the whole mystery of life.
That is why I keep repeating: "A mom is a mom”
Soul, I could never describe the intensity of the joy that engulfed me and made me shiver on that memorable afternoon.
However, my spirit is going to tickle your spirit as it did on the day when we had to fight to dispel the feeling of distance between us.
I will transmit to your spirit any unspoken words at the appropriate time or I can simply say:" Beautiful experience for a young mother!" I hope that this new encounter will grow into the harmonious unity of our family just as we told each other when, way back, we sat on a canape not far from the guenep tree, silent witness to our confidences.
We are like a three-branched tree
Scattering our seeds to the four winds
The buds of love still unfold
Though the triplets are separated
Untold, serene joy dwells in our spirit
The life of a mother and a father is a life of sacrifices.
When a great distance o of two a hundred leagues slithers through everyday realities, all responsibilities belall the mother.
This is the load I ask you to carry during my absence 
because, as I said before, a mom remains always a mom.
No matter the age of a child, young or adult, no matter the sacrifice, a mother is always ready to devote herself to the wellbeing of her children. 
As the saying goes
"a mother's arms never refuse to offer shelter to her brood, good or bad." 
But, do you know, Soul, I always lived in the shelter of my mother.
Today is the day, while thinking of your delivery, when I reflect on the great mystery of childbirth.
Soul, I would love to share a lot of things with you.
My thoughts must come second to the unexpected joy of the arrival of the twins who supersede everything,
One more time, I beg you to be strong.
It's a long road, true.
Nevertheless, to repeat old adage dear to our wise friends from the back country: Our patience must continue to shoot the cannons of hope all the way through the summits of the "Guinaudée.
Therefore, hold on tight, Soul!
Don't let go! 
It's with a double happiness that I blowa double kiss to you and our twins.
Woman, you carry life
Dear Ife,
You asked me to be patient.
I agree. Dont worry about me.
I can survive.
As you know, I have accepted the distance that separated us forawhile like a cross. I would have let it fall if I had wished to. 
My trouble started on the terrace not far from the quenepe when I gave you my word.

However, never forget the four of us, you, myself, the children we are in a squeeze. 
Together we would like our love to escape the trials of our existence, to grow and rise in harmony as it was lor Pekou and Da.
Let us be strong.
Let us tighten our belts.
Let us go forward.
Remember, before you wrote Zile Nou. you told me:
Woman, you carry life
You transport it across the face of the sun Thanks to you, misery melts away  While I clamber around the rocks  The water falls down the valley  And you make a sail out of the wind  Bedecking it with a rainbow of hope
However, Ife we would not want to be taken by surprise.
I hope that wisdom will always prevail.
"The sun in New York runs upside down' according to one of our songs while we in Montreal move on ice rinks.
It is better or a family to stumble on icy ground together than see the ground crumble under the weight of a mother and three children in a sorry state, waiting for the return of a father away, studying.
In truth when we found ourselves all of us in the same boat, good or bad, we survived.
I want to remind you that I am not carrying that load. 
I am pulling it behind me.  `
I am being torn to pieces.
Even though I grumble, you can count on me. 
I love you.
When I am feeling down, I open wide the gates of my memories to the luminous flow of our promises from days gone by.
Their vividness dissipates my misfortune when my heart is submerged in grief.
If this long wait has not vanquished my resolve, the day has not yet come when I would be forced to abandon our plans from when we were young.
The light of hope will shine in the gardens of our dreams up to the precious time that sees us reunited, you, me and the children at the foot of the tree of truth.
On that day, we will celebrate; we will sing praise so that the bouquet of our affection will continue to bloom in the same atmosphere of sincerity that keeps us more and more closely together. 
People believe, I think, that I try to explain your absence from Montreal by using the pretense of a husband away at school. 
For that reason, I am giving you all the encouragement you need and by the same token, ensure that our love will grow stronger day by day. 
I am counting on you.
The children are counting on you.
We live with great expectation, like a thirsty field longing for the smell of the rain.
No matter what the length of the road, it's what awaits us at the end that counts.
Life takes so many short cuts that we are never sure where it's going to lead us.
Who would have thought that we would agree today to write in the Creole language? After each period of trials comes a diflerent time.
This having been said, we will resume this brief commentary on Creole in another letter.
Good bye.
Hold on tightly.
Don't be discouraged.
Hugs and kisses from your darling Soul.
The flamnes will burn Sweeter, warmer and brighter
Good morning Soul,
I am so glad that you find ways to shore up your courage in order to wait for me.
Here, life demands sacrifices and discipline.
If we let the tinsel, bells and whistles that flash along the way seduce us, before we know it our souls will go bankrupt and our drearms will perislh with our life on the shelves of the pawn brokers.
Earthly goods, instrumer of pleasure, are calling me by name.
In spite of it all, my education rermains my sole preoccupation.
I know temptation is an open trap waiting for all the lovers who shun their responsibilities.
We accept to live apart for so long so that we can build together a cathedral of dreams.
Whatever the dream, Soul, if it starts off on the wrong path, it will fall by the wayside. I am slow, it's true. No one can build a dream in the space of a heartbeat.
For a drean to turn into reality, it must face all kinds of tests:
deprivation, 
separation,
sickness,
...
All these roadblocks I face one after the other sometimes two, three at the same time, sometimes in succession - in my quest for a solid foundation on which to build our dreams.
Yet, should they become reality, we should not stop there.

We should strive to keep our achievement intact–
thus, the struggle for life must go on.
If everyday life forces us to walk the tortuous and painful road of separation, we should strive to keep our balance and avoid the risk of slipping up in our comings and goings between New York and Montreal.
Soul, being here is like living in a China shop in the middle of a fragile town.
You take small steps.
You tiptoe And avoid frightening the doe You said your promises Are like candles of hope 
Darling
The flames will burn Sweeter, warmer and brighter 
The day I come to the end 
of all the trials and tribulations
Without tearing out Even one hair
Adieu, Soul.
Be strong, 
Love and kisses.
The most neaningful harmony
Dear Soul.
I cannot wait for your answer belore writing to you again. 
In a memo you sent to me, you broached the subject of harmony but.
I would like to offer my opinion on this topic.
Perhaps you dont understand, but harmony, you see, iS up to you alone to create.
It must Spring from your intimate being, One can lean on someone else to create it.
but this type of harmony born out of external relationship with ones surroundings is always ephemeral.
Once the correspondent decides to break away, all understanding evaporates into thin air like the dew after sunrise.
The most meaningful harmony is born from you when you reflect on all of your actions and of all the words you utter. 
After having considered these, you can display a panoply of steps that will help you develop the means to bring them to reality. 
This way, you can formulate your own wishes and in that serene attitude towards yourself.
you can plan for projects born out of the realities of your own life.
hope you can make the necessary effort to find in yourself the elements that will help you to build the harmony you thought you had lost during your tender years.



I am going now 
leaving you with all my love.
Today my sorrow will run its course
Dear Ife,
I understand your rebuke.
You say you can make no promises because, as far as feelings go, if our heads and hearts share the same space,
each one evolves according to its own plan.
However, today my sorrow will run its course and engage you in a dialogue.
To that end, I captured it and harmonised it for you like the soulful beat ofa drum at the bottom of my heart.
Let the vibrations touch you.
You are in my life
You enter my life
Like a bolt of lightning
You light the way for me 
A brief instant
The space of a wink 
You disappear
You comne back
Like the moon in June
In a game of hide-and-seek
You touch my hand
And oh! Surprise!
You steal away
You steal back into my space
You take me in your embrace, shake me
You make me shiver Like a hurricane
Then you must be on your way
You set me down, gently
You melt into the mist
In my dreams smashed into a thousand pieces
Will it ever be possible to fathom
The intense turnoil
That your distant life
Drags in the wake of our love?
I leave with a leaden heart.
We will talk again soon. 
Soul
Dreams Without frontier
Soul,
It was a beautiful afternoon in March, 22 years ago.

I was at your house sitting next to you on the love seat.
On that day, although my entire body was shaking with fear, 
I ventured to ask for that first kiss that would seal the secret pact we had made. 
I remember it as if it were yesterday. 
You kissed me with all your heart. 

When I reached the other side of the gate, I was completely overwhelmed with joy. 
I felt fearless.
My chest swelled with pride and I was walking on clouds.
Will there ever be a kiss like that first kiss?
Soul, I can't remember the details of those times gone by:
All I know is that it was a Saturday.
One of those sunny, unforgettable Saturdays we used to enjoy back home.
A Saturday that bears no resenblance to today. 
From where I sit I can see only a vast, snow-covered white expanse and it's so cold outside.
No, the day you gave me that kiss, the tangible sign of our alliance, it was a day of celebration in my heart and in your mind.
In those days, snow was a climnatic reality known only from books written in a foreign language.
We never dreant that one day we would have to share our knowledge with children in North America.
We loved our Haiti Toma so much and we had such big dreams for her. 
Today, we are still dreaming We will never stop dreaming:
Dreams For our family 
Dreams For our homeland
Dreams Without frontier
That will put our feelings on solid ground 
While festooning our horizon
With images and echoes of songs
That fill the space bey ond our body.
Our two lives will fuse into one like those spirits dwelling at the source of the water, mistress of all forms of life on earth. 
That's when our dream will enter a new dimension where age, like cold water, will temper our achievernents.
We will not realise all our dreams - that's a fact.
Because unattainable perfection will continue to elude us, we are bound to go on.

Happy anniversary
Big kisses
I love you 
From lfe To Soul
I love you, Soul
My beloved Soul,
Today I revisit the time when my head went spinning in search of the effluvium of your charm in the area of La Source Turgeau. I wanted then to caress my dreams, eyes open, the gloss of your lips.
If you recall, during our rendez-vous I used to take pleasure describing all the shortcuts I used to take to avoid Frantz who could not help rerminding me of my responsibilities as a student.
It was about that time that, like a burgeoning dream in the moonlight, you invaded my whole being - limb by limb - and you took roots inside me, blooming through my mind.
Today, I look at us and try to count the telltale signs of life's daily struggles.
Your movement is affected by reflection, sorrow and stress.
Yet you are the same, with the that continues to feed the flame of our passion all the way to the ashes of our pleasure.
True, next to me you have matured but the aroma you exhale is unparalleled in its deliciousness.
There was a time when we could not comprehend the impetuousness of our senses.
We were wearing our shoes on the wrong feet.
Today, we share each other's fears as well as each other's delights.
We voyage together on life's highways.
We sail with a gentle breeze at our backs, oblivious to the turbulence that might upset our skif.
We have learned to face those little upsets.
In the calm of the day,
We bring our colours down
And we mend the sails Of our sorrows.
I love you., Soul,
like the dreamy undulations of the Grande Anse
which, at nightfall, dip into the sweet waters of the Artibonite.
If one day we decided to explore our roots,
wouldnt we discover ourselves side-by-side 
on the shore of those rivers, picking the fruits of what our love has patiently continued to sow?
Good Bye
Big kisses
Oh! How sweet it would be if every day could be Friday
Good evening Soul,
I still recall those crazy Fridays full of laughter.
You see, Soul, when you want to, you can let yourself go, softly.
On Friday, it was the hearty laughter, 
the heady laughter of the terrace.
Tonight, it's that phrase from that songstress that overwhelms me 
as in good old days when I skipped my trigonometry classes to come and join you on the yesteryear, in the heart of our tender a adolescence. The sentence in which the songwriter had tried to smother the moon with a blue wave.
Do you remember? We laughed.
But you dont realize today that we, too, have our wave.
It's that famous wave, 
unchained yet full of I grace and calmness that a colleague had exchanged for a painting of Heads of States.
That wave, Our wave, seems to be bounding bevond the moon.
It's as though it went after the sun which, fecling threatened to refuge behind a light cloud.
It's the wave that you hung on my right hand side in the study room and which from time to time comes to remind me of the joyful days when we were eighteen.
By choosing the painting of Heads of States, this colleague had turned his back on the two doves flying across the restless wave not far from the clouded sun. 
From time to time, I look at this painting with infinite passion. Soul, I dont know how to thank you for those Friday evenings.
They always opened under the sign of a good laugh. 

The pure laughter, the beautiful laughter of our adolescence which does not cease to send me echoes of the verses of the poet:
When you are laughing
Darling
The wind rushes in
To share in the laughing
I feel all warm within
Darling


Yes, Soul, Friday night you Surprised me, laughing myself senseless, delirious
as in the past, in the shade of the blossoming guenepe tree with a lollipop sweetening the tips of Our lips. 
Those days, we used to dream beautiful dreams with our eyes open.
We still do today. We believe in the dream of better days to come.
Great moments, Soul, one carries them within.
Those are springs of happiness that will carry streams of happiness into the dull days of our later lives.
Those are the ones that will bring nostalgic Smiles to the corners of our elderly lips.
Great moments.
They are the ones that make us vibrate in unison in our thoughts as well as in our deeds.
Yes, on Friday
we delighted in the pleasure of being alone. 
Sitting at the table, we both had a chance to relive the beautiful seasons of our adolescence.
Friday night our eyes were not lit with burning, probing questions.
One melted into the arms of the other.
We let our lids drop like a curtain on a one act plav (mavbe tiredness) and the flame that
sparkled in the depth of our eyes subsided. We did everything, took every precaution in order to enjoy the moment without fear.
These momnents, Soul, they cannot be created.
They come, spontaneously, without warning, laced with unforgettable delight.
Oh! How sweet it would be if every day could be Friday 
I love you Soul.
Hold on tightly.
Big Kisses
Each beam of light that illuminates it
Beloved Soul.
Today I write this new letter to continue the tender dialogue at the point where yom an abrupt stop to my enthusiasm.
Remember, Soul, the last time we spoke, I explained to you how the gates of the garden of my memories remain open towards a past that will not close.
The truth is, when mother Femi and my father Nounn left this world,
I felt drowned in loneliness.
My boat was no longer moored and I am now alone without a safety line although I am awar Soul, that you are with me.
Since the skiff of my life is thrown relentlessly from crest lo trough, I have lost my bearing, 



My only challenge is to try to find the harmony betxeen my life and my memories.
I must reach down deep into my brain to find the seed of power that will allow me to deal with the reality of my loneliness.
At that precise instant you told me that the comings and goings of bygone facts are the fruits of the mysteries of life. 
Then, in a pensive nmood, you added:
" Behind themountains lies not Guinea. One discovers other mountains" 
You also made me understand that ife's train has no stops.
Once it becomes immobile, it must take on a new name.
I answered immediately:
Is there really another life after this one?"
You pretended not to hear.
Time and time again, that was your way of putting an end to our exchanges. Either you wanted to get away from me or you wanted to hide your weaknesses.
I have taken the time to muse over your proverbs and I have reached the conclusion that in order to win in the game of chance, our life has chosen the tactics of running head first as in a game of football. It does not discriminate.

It runs ahead. blind to the multitude.
Meanwhile, our memories jump on a merrygo-round, and trigger a spark which, from time to time, tickle the wombs of the past with its flames.
Sometimes it's a perfume that animates its soul.
Sometimes it's a simple word that wakens it from its sleep.
This way, it's our entire being that is shaken, turned topsy-turvy and pulled in all directions.
And if at last it finds the wherewithal to go through this cul-de-sac and Survive, it can also lose control and be overcome by anguish.
That's when we feel the need to be in touch with the mysterious forces around us and in the world beyond.
The more I think about what you say, the more I discover the extent of the intense void created by my parents' absence. In spite of our strength, we need the sustenance of a roots to each particle of soil. Each beam of light that presence to filter through our roo illuminates it, each drop of water that quenches its thirst makes it grow.
Though we feel strong and powerful Time after time a mere presence Will let its sap fill us to the core. Precious moments of days gone by, When the dead leaves kiss the clay.
When the parched clay sips each drop, It's the red and gold of our dream That ebb and flow, then lay to rest.
The soothing silence, like a pathway From which we dream.
It's us two, united, Growing in the garden of the universe.
I must keep on growing until I reach mny full potential. I must find my own strength as a solitary traveller within the limits of my existence.
That's when I will then realize that I have attained real adulthood.
As I relive the words of your advice I understand why I should not let the past overshad- ow the present.
That is why I shall hit the pause button of my memories and fast for- ward on our lifes memories for the sake of our children who need us to strengthen their roots.
In reality, it's on the basis of our own memories that our son and daughters are going to learn. Their turn will come to accept the truth of what I am facing today.
It's with regrets that I am going away.
Thank you for the light that you gave likea balm to my existence.
Tender kisses.
Each leaf is a colourful messenger 
This is my third attempt at writing ths letter.
Each time I grab my pen to let my spirit soar, my thoughts turn out to be different Irom my ideas.
Sometimes the words start to run in an explosion of laughter.
Sometimes they seem to take a ticklish pleasure in exposing me naked.
Other times, my thoughts quicken so much that they seem to be playing tricks on me.
Today
I only want to exhort you to be strong.
Life does not flow without ripples,
That is why this afternoon, there is no boulevard or drive that I would not haunt with you.
There is no trip I would not take to collect three joyful thoughts in the yard of the master of the universe and fly you to the other side of this calvary of sorrows.
So, you will spend the afternoon swaying the sun high and low, far and wide, in your mind.
How wonderful it would be.
Pity, though.
If I lived for an eternity, I would never possess such power.
That is why I offer you a simple walk under the wings of autumn, along the paths of Hunt Club.
Cone on!
Get up!
Let your soul invade your spirit 
It's autumn
Open your eyes wide
Let the richness ofthe leaves Play in your arms.
Nothing talks like autumn leaves
Each one is a colourful messenger
Waiting for the wind to shower you 
In a polytonal marvel.
The farther you walk, the more the halos will engulf you, will lift you while holding your arm, will tie your distress in coloured ribbons.
Keep going and the leaves will dance a 'croisé-le-huit" and will fan out in a welcoming, soothing carpet of rainbow, And the joy of your heart will melt your sorrows.
Every day brings its own tribulations.
Tonight, take a load off your shoulder and leave it by the roadside next to the "Sablier" .
Leave them there 
and let the carpenter ants fight among themselves and from the compost will bloom sprays of joy.
Life goes on, Soul, sequence by sequence, the best and the worst.
Winter precedes spring.
Life precedes death 
and sorrows build up our strength so that we can fully rejoice.
Do not allow the young ones to extinguish the splendour of your heart with their hotheadedness.
Don't let their nonchalance sink your spirit in the tormented waves.
Above all, don't allow the casualness of young adults tickle your nerves.
No matter what, the crystal vase that is life lies squarely in their hands.
Is up to them to learn to carry it.
Get dressed.
Go out.
walk 
Walk until your body rebels.
In the sequence of your steps, your spirit :
shall laugh again, as the poet put it. Letting go pent-up laughter of your body.
If joy can invade you with the same harmony we used to know,
you will feel that I too will be shaken by the contagion of spirit shall free itself from the bonds of suffering and you shall our laughter.
Come on!
Wake up!
Life goes on in sequence.
If you fall, you pick yourself up.
You rise with or without my help.
If you end up standing before I reach you, you will feel me by your side.
At that instant, both our arms will unfold and you can die of laughter in my arns.
Hold on tightly! Don't let go!
Truly, life is full of sequences.
Life goes on in sequence.
Big kisses
Ife The rainbow flows like a watercolour 
Good morning Soul,
Last night you spoke to me as I was lost in deep reflection.
I I was trying to find away to ease your pain.
I was thinking of the kind of book that I should give you that would lit your spirit.
I was thinking of a lot of other possibilities.
In the end, however, ,I decided to write this letter.
Soul! What is done is done. You can moan and groan and damn everything around yoy or what you perceive as the cause of your tribulations.
All those unhealthy though  will not right the wrong that has been done.
I know you wallow in self pity.
You lie awake at night, eyes riveted on your heartbreaks,
wondering what mistakes have brought so much desolation on your doorstep.
This attitude will not solve your dilemma. The only thing I can say is this.
All of us living on this planet have dreams.
Let's dress our dreams with festoons and gems The winds of hope are on a quest
Riding the stars above Twinkling like Kristelle's tinsels
The rainbow flows like a watercolour.
Let the flood of life rush in To quench Earth's thirst for light.
We dress them up so that they will assume our own personality.
Only death can separate them from us.
It's so true
that even when we have to lean heavily on Our walking stick we don't stop dreaming,
When we reach that milestone, we start winnowing all things we had desired to pick out that could enrich the lives of our grand children.
That is why I am telling you this.
You may have missed an opportunity 
but there is no reason to believe that the wonderful dreams we carry for our children, our country and our loved ones are no longer reachable.
Lifes sufferings are more bitter than sweet 
and we cant help asking: "Why me?"
It doesnt mean that we wish our Sorrows On others.
It simply means that wve do not know how to exit an impasse.
Yet, the strength we seek is already within us,
Meditate!
Ask questions!
Answers are within reach.
I don't have easy, ready-made answers to lay at your feet 
but by talking, by probing into what we are about to undertake we will find it possible to set our dreams on an appropriate cOurse.
Day to day life i is full of dead ends.
We must face them one after the other, one at a time, until we reach the depths of our soul.
As we stumble on the road of life 
we must keep our passion in check and avoid overreaching,
Otherwise our life would be strewn with a succession of disappointmnents not unlike the beads of a rosary.
Soul,
the road to lile is full of obstacles.
No one knows the outcome in advance.
That is we have to keep on pooling our knowledge until we reach the end of that voyage.
Never forget that we are travellers and through our perambulation,
each step we take is an opportunity for someone, a family member,
a friend to grow with us 
while our inner self experiences a touch of beauty.
I wanted to share these thoughts with you tonight hoping that you would understand.
I hope that you will let them leave their imprints one at a time until the secret treasure chest we all carry within ourselves is full.
Yes, Soul,
each one of us is a treasure chest.
By digging relentlessly we will find the gold pieces hidden within ourselves.

Let's keep on amassing the beautiful and precious gems in the treasure chest of our heart.
Be strong, be courageous
Life is renewed in every step you take 
Each obstacle opens up unto a road.
Each road unwinds, full of secrets 
We will never discover
What time is hiding from us.
Dont give up.
I love you my darling Soul Ife 
They are twinkling stars 
Dear Soul,
Today as I toiled at the UPS office where I work, I had an out- -of- body experience, a kind of dream akin to a diaphanous rain.
I could revisit those places
where thousands of love butterflies alighted on flower petals, explosions of lights iluminating the heat of Our caresses.
We roamed open spaces;
we travelled together.
We should have gone farther.
The spartks of memories reaching me tonight, Tajmahal, Lexington, Seacaucus, Dorchester Hayat, Randolph and Blue Hill surround me and speak to me of your preciouS presence.
Each one of those places vibrates with its own harmony.
However, I can't think of Lexington without the waves of Hamilton creeping in and creating a discordance that tempers my ardour.

It is possible for you to misunderstand or not fully accept.
But, in a sense, you must bear the responsibility 
because you never stop associating this river with the illusion of a so-called reality born from your imagination, from your disquietude.
Above all.
I wonder, with you who are blessed with such perspicacity, you ever so vigilant.
how could I go roaming about, playing the field while your keen eyes scrutinised my every move?
Let's step back, shall we?
I believe it's possible for Lexington to be inhabited by another Hamilton.
River, city, back streets.
No matter!
In the meantime I invite you to meditate on this idea:
no real happiness will ever exist unless you shelter me under your wingor rather, unless I shelter you under my wing.
As in the words of my perspicacious friend:
"Once you have tasted the waters of the Nile you will be unable to quench your hirst elsewhere'"
Ah yes, I am losing my train of thought.
Tajmahal, Seacaucus, Dorchester, Hayatt, Randolph, Blue Hill,
They are twinkling stars In the firmament of our infinite love.
They don't all shine with the same intensity but together, ina symphony of light, they guide us through the galaxy of the love that has bound us since high school.
Each one summons forth tender springs of our love life.
Each one has a special way of opening our the first bloom in the garden of our passion?
Could it be the first site where we slept in eyes on our love, on the social realities that govern our own comportment.
Is Tajmahal total and peaceful abandon like a pair of twins?
Lexington created Soul, this mystical name born from the fiery source of our ardent embrace where the spoken words remain devoid of meanings.
Yet it's at SeacausCus and Dorchester that our desires cOuld have withered.
Like a vine dying off a sour sop tree, your body grew limp with indifference as the Hudson River tickled the fog unfolding like an embroidery over ouur imaginary somnolence.
Reaching Hayatt, like a fairground entertainer who lost his voice, 
we hitched a ride on a carousel and reached the head spinning heights of Makaya not far from the old wharf.
From then on your reticence changed into pleasure.
Our romance would unfurl on a new thread of unbridled passion.
We would have made love until we reaching reached Randolph Avenue with this delirium in our bodies which, upon Blue Hill culminated in abstinence.
Breathless, we arrived at Cité Randolph our bodies trembling with pent-up pleasure and our voices full of joyful notes that could awaken the innocent.
After this marathon of unbridled passion, mny strength dwindled in the middle of the intimate engagement of our intertwined bodies, not without a certain fear that would ave left its marks.
Upon reflection, I could hardly complain.
All good fighting cocks are expected to die in the middle of the arena.
As for Blue Hill, this place will be alive in the expectation of a dream to be fulfilled or to be enclosed in a crystal crypt.
All in all,
no matter how we approach it, 
Blue Hill will remain a mystery to be unveiled in Lavilokan 
where the high notes of our discourse remain a present-absent power watching over Our love.
From Ife to Soul the Woman-Sun blooming in his life garden.
See the light of hope In your sparkling eyes
Dear Soul, 
No doubt events of yesteryear have that rare virtue of bringing back the bouquet of our childhood experience.
They also have the power of revisiting the trails of our darkest hours, when we carried the heaviest loads on our shoulders.
These are the burdens of those who once had loved but had not managed to quench their fire even when their love seemed to have faltered.
It appears that nothing can change our existing life conditions.
Therefore, we must live with the tightness of our heart,
not forgetting that it is an arduous task for me not to hold on to the very souvenirs you force me to erase from mny memory.
How can I not,
Looking at you 
See the light of hope In your sparkling eyes?
In the Sweet curves 0f your tantalizing lips?
Around the tips of the bundle of your senses?
The pulsing waves Around the lake of my eyes?
I will never have the courage to abandon this honeycomb to some scavengers to enjoy in my place.
Yes!
Like a wisp You slide through my fingers.
Like porcelain Your fragile presence dwells In the recesses of my soul.
Let's hold our distance and keep our balance on the tightrope of our dream.
Big, passionate kisses.
From Ife for Soul, his love for ever.
You point me in the right direction without a compass You give me wings Soul.
Each human being is a source of energy moving through the universe.
The me positive the energy the more it allows us to grow giving us further strength to move forward in the whirlwind of a dream-like world.
You always say that
the creative force of the spirit is the most marvelous resource that we human beings possess in order to transform matter
Reason over Flesh: Right?
The more we give in to reason, the more our thoughts, our hopes and our dreams will he encased in powerful positive energy.
Each time these words illuminate my spirit a stream of ideas opens my eyes on the road we have travelled so far.
In peaceful times, as well as in troubled times, our relationship is like a short trip undertaken by two beings, a trip in which every inch of the road leads us to the discovery of our selves.
We travel together but this trip becomes a workshop where we each develop our personality.
Soul I do not know 
You bring me to life Without touching me
You guide me Without a compass 
You give me wings Suddenly 
We learn how to soar with each updraft, motionless.
Our travel moves along a direction we have already chosen.
Whatever mneans we have at our disposal, motion equals I earning,
and learning leads to beauty and wonderment.
Since we never stop learning, we consider our trip a constant motion in time and space.
Our primordial role is to build this happy and healt2qhy world with those near and far who are travelling to find the means to build their own lives.
Soul, Please
Each time I miss a step 
Draw me closer to your heart
Shine a guiding light And walk me To the dawn The sign of renewed hope
I will capture a beam to shine on us and keep intact the rhythm of our steps.
Sometimes they will sound hesitant.
As long as we can feel our heartbeat we shall not despair.
We have no right to discard our trowels.
As well, we shall persevere in helping those who dream to build their cathedral.
Whatever the scale of our dream To sculpt beauty into the stone of love 
Whatever the rhythms of words of love That addpolish to the crystal of their dreams 
Whatever the heights that must be climbed To paint the aquarelle of their hope 
As long as they show willpower we must stand up and proffer a helping hand.
Each monument of hope they raise in a spirit of goodness,
each masterpiece created with wisdom is a reflection of achievement 
us as a community  
that keeps on making strides in the daily struggle to cross the river and move farther and farther during our passage on earth.
Soul, each one of us is a link in the necklace of life.
Each time one of us fails because of an act of malice.
all of us fall victims to the chaos that results.
Each time we step into the limelight we pave a new path for those who come behind and follow in our footsteps.
Let's keep on seeking the light, faithfully, without being blinded by foolish pride.
You can't travel life's highways without some kind of help.
Think of ours as a limitless trip where the finish line-if we have to think of one-is the grave.
We all get there at a precise instant.
When that happens, everyone will benefit from our deeds.
This is why you must go on guiding me.
As well, if we learn to guide others, the whole load on lives will become lighter during our trip on the blue planet.
Good bye!
That was Ife who loves you very much.





